The Metric Tide
Report of the Independent Review of the Role of Metrics
in Research Assessment and Management

July 2015

Authors
James Wilsdon, Liz Allen, Eleonora Belfiore, Philip Campbell, Stephen Curry,
Steven Hill, Richard Jones, Roger Kain, Simon Kerridge, Mike Thelwall, Jane Tinkler,
Ian Viney, Paul Wouters, Jude Hill, Ben Johnson.

Cite as
Wilsdon, J., et al. (2015). The Metric Tide: Report of the Independent Review of the Role of
Metrics in Research Assessment and Management. DOI: 10.13140/RG.2.1.4929.1363

© HEFCE 2015, except where indicated.
Cover image © JL-Pfeifer / Shutterstock.com.

The parts of this work that are © HEFCE are available under the Open Government Licence 2.0:
www.nationalarchives.gov.uk/doc/open-government-licence/version/2

ISBN: 1902369273
DOI: 10.13140/RG.2.1.4929.1363
Twitter: #HEFCEmetrics

i

Contents
Foreword ................................................................................................................................................ iii
Acknowledgments.................................................................................................................................. iv
Steering group and secretariat ................................................................................................................. v
Executive summary ............................................................................................................................... vii
1.

Measuring up ................................................................................................................................... 1

2.

The rising tide ............................................................................................................................... 12

3.

Rough indications.......................................................................................................................... 30

4.

Disciplinary dilemmas .................................................................................................................. 50

5.

Judgement and peer review ........................................................................................................... 59

6.

Management by metrics ................................................................................................................ 68

7.

Cultures of counting ...................................................................................................................... 79

8.

Sciences in transition..................................................................................................................... 96

9.

Reflections on REF ..................................................................................................................... 117

10. Responsible metrics .................................................................................................................... 134
Annex of tables ................................................................................................................................... 148
List of abbreviations and glossary ...................................................................................................... 161

Published separately:
The Metric Tide: Literature Review (Supplementary Report I to the Independent
Review of the Role of Metrics in Research Assessment and Management)
The Metric Tide: Correlation analysis of REF2014 scores and metrics
(Supplementary Report II to the Independent Review of the Role of Metrics in
Research Assessment and Management)

ii

Foreword
Metrics evoke a mixed reaction from the research community.
A commitment to using data and evidence to inform decisions makes
many of us sympathetic, even enthusiastic, about the prospect of granular,
real-time analysis of our own activities. If we as a sector can’t take full
advantage of the possibilities of big data, then who can?
Yet we only have to look around us, at the blunt use of metrics such as
journal impact factors, h-indices and grant income targets to be reminded
of the pitfalls. Some of the most precious qualities of academic culture
resist simple quantification, and individual indicators can struggle to do justice to the richness and
plurality of our research. Too often, poorly designed evaluation criteria are “dominating minds,
distorting behaviour and determining careers.” 1 At their worst, metrics can contribute to what Rowan
Williams, the former Archbishop of Canterbury, calls a “new barbarity” in our universities.2 The
tragic case of Stefan Grimm, whose suicide in September 2014 led Imperial College to launch a
review of its use of performance metrics, is a jolting reminder that what's at stake in these debates is
more than just the design of effective management systems.3 Metrics hold real power: they are
constitutive of values, identities and livelihoods.
How to exercise that power to positive ends is the focus of this report. Based on fifteen months of
evidence-gathering, analysis and consultation, we propose here a framework for responsible metrics,
and make a series of targeted recommendations. Together these are designed to ensure that indicators
and underlying data infrastructure develop in ways that support the diverse qualities and impacts of
UK research. Looking to the future, we show how responsible metrics can be applied in research
management, by funders, and in the next cycle of the Research Excellence Framework.
The metric tide is certainly rising. Unlike King Canute, we have the agency and opportunity – and in
this report, a serious body of evidence – to influence how it washes through higher education and
research. Let me end on a note of personal thanks to my steering group colleagues, to the team at
HEFCE, and to all those across the community who have contributed to our deliberations.

James Wilsdon, Chair

1 Lawrence, P.A. (2007) ‘The mismeasurement of science’. Current Biology Vol.17, Issue 15, pR583–R585.
2 Annual Lecture to the Council for the Defence of British Universities, January 2015.
3 https://www.timeshighereducation.co.uk/news/stefan-grimms-death-leads-imperial-to-review-performance-

metrics/2019381.article. Retrieved 22 June 2015.

iii

Acknowledgments
The steering group would like to extend its sincere thanks to the numerous organisations and
individuals who have informed the work of the review. Metrics can be a contentious topic, but the
expertise, insight, challenge and open engagement that so many across the higher education and
research community have brought to this process has made it both enjoyable and instructive.
Space unfortunately limits us from mentioning everyone by name. But particular thanks to David
Willetts for commissioning the review and provoking us at the outset to frame it more expansively,
and to his ministerial successors Greg Clark and Jo Johnson for the interest they have shown in its
progress and findings. Thanks also to Dr Carolyn Reeve at BIS for ensuring close government
engagement with the project.
The review would not have been possible without the outstanding support that we have received from
the research policy team at HEFCE at every stage of research, evidence-gathering and report drafting;
notably Jude Hill, Ben Johnson, Alex Herbert, Kate Turton, Tamsin Rott and Sophie Melton-Bradley.
Thanks also to David Sweeney at HEFCE for his advice and insights.
We are indebted to all those who responded to our call for evidence; attended, participated in and
spoke at our workshops and focus groups; and contributed to online discussions. Thanks also to those
organisations who hosted events linked to the review, including the Universities of Oxford, Sheffield,
Sussex, UCL and Warwick, the Higher Education Policy Institute and the Scottish Funding Council.
The review has hugely benefited from the quality and breadth of these contributions. Any errors or
omissions are entirely our own.

iv

Steering group and secretariat
The review was chaired by James Wilsdon FAcSS, Professor of Science and Democracy at the
Science Policy Research Unit (SPRU), University of Sussex (orcid.org/0000-0002-5395-5949;
@jameswilsdon).
Professor Wilsdon was supported by an independent steering group with the following members:



Dr Liz Allen, Head of Evaluation, Wellcome Trust (orcid.org/0000-0002-9298-3168;
@allen_liz);



Dr Eleonora Belfiore, Associate Professor in Cultural Policy, Centre for Cultural Policy
Studies, University of Warwick (orcid.org/0000-0001-7825-4615; @elebelfiore);



Sir Philip Campbell, Editor-in-Chief, Nature (orcid.org/0000-0002-8917-1740;
@NatureNews);



Professor Stephen Curry, Department of Life Sciences, Imperial College London
(orcid.org/0000-0002-0552-8870; @Stephen_Curry);



Dr Steven Hill, Head of Research Policy, HEFCE (orcid.org/0000-0003-1799-1915;
@stevenhill);



Professor Richard Jones FRS, Pro-Vice-Chancellor for Research and Innovation,
University of Sheffield (orcid.org/0000-0001-5400-6369; @RichardALJones)
(representing the Royal Society);



Professor Roger Kain FBA, Dean and Chief Executive, School of Advanced Study,
University of London (orcid.org/0000-0003-1971-7338; @kain_SAS) (representing the
British Academy);



Dr Simon Kerridge, Director of Research Services, University of Kent, and Chair of the
Board of the Association of Research Managers and Administrators (orcid.org/00000003-4094-3719; @SimonRKerridge);



Professor Mike Thelwall, Statistical Cybermetrics Research Group, University of
Wolverhampton (orcid.org/0000-0001-6065-205X; @mikethelwall);



Jane Tinkler, Social Science Adviser, Parliamentary Office of Science and Technology
(orcid.org/0000-0002-5306-3940; @janetinkler);

v



Dr Ian Viney, MRC Director of Strategic Evaluation and Impact, Medical Research
Council head office, London (orcid.org/0000-0002-9943-4989, @MRCEval);



Paul Wouters, Professor of Scientometrics & Director, Centre for Science and
Technology Studies (CWTS), Leiden University (orcid.org/0000-0002-4324-5732,
@paulwouters).

The following members of HEFCE’s research policy team provided the secretariat for the steering
group and supported the review process throughout: Jude Hill, Ben Johnson, Alex Herbert, Kate
Turton, Tamsin Rott and Sophie Melton-Bradley. Hannah White and Mark Gittoes from HEFCE’s
Analytical Services Directorate also contributed, particularly to the REF2014 correlation exercise (see
Supplementary Report II). Vicky Jones from the REF team also provided advice.

vi

Executive summary
This report presents the findings and recommendations of the Independent Review of the Role of
Metrics in Research Assessment and Management. The review was chaired by Professor James
Wilsdon, supported by an independent and multidisciplinary group of experts in scientometrics,
research funding, research policy, publishing, university management and administration.

Scope of the review
This review has gone beyond earlier studies to take a deeper look at potential uses and limitations of
research metrics and indicators. It has explored the use of metrics across different disciplines, and
assessed their potential contribution to the development of research excellence and impact. It has
analysed their role in processes of research assessment, including the next cycle of the Research
Excellence Framework (REF). It has considered the changing ways in which universities are using
quantitative indicators in their management systems, and the growing power of league tables and
rankings. And it has considered the negative or unintended effects of metrics on various aspects of
research culture.
Our report starts by tracing the history of metrics in research management and assessment, in the UK
and internationally. It looks at the applicability of metrics within different research cultures, compares
the peer review system with metric-based alternatives, and considers what balance might be struck
between the two. It charts the development of research management systems within institutions, and
examines the effects of the growing use of quantitative indicators on different aspects of research
culture, including performance management, equality, diversity, interdisciplinarity, and the ‘gaming’
of assessment systems. The review looks at how different funders are using quantitative indicators,
and considers their potential role in research and innovation policy. Finally, it examines the role that
metrics played in REF2014, and outlines scenarios for their contribution to future exercises.
The review has drawn on a diverse evidence base to develop its findings and conclusions. These
include: a formal call for evidence; a comprehensive review of the literature (Supplementary Report
I); and extensive consultation with stakeholders at focus groups, workshops, and via traditional and
new media.
The review has also drawn on HEFCE’s recent evaluations of REF2014, and commissioned its own
detailed analysis of the correlation between REF2014 scores and a basket of metrics (Supplementary
Report II).

vii

Headline findings4
There are powerful currents whipping up the metric tide. These include growing pressures for
audit and evaluation of public spending on higher education and research; demands by policymakers
for more strategic intelligence on research quality and impact; the need for institutions to manage and
develop their strategies for research; competition within and between institutions for prestige,
students, staff and resources; and increases in the availability of real-time ‘big data’ on research
uptake, and the capacity of tools for analysing them.
Across the research community, the description, production and consumption of ‘metrics’
remains contested and open to misunderstandings. In a positive sense, wider use of quantitative
indicators, and the emergence of alternative metrics for societal impact, could support the transition to
a more open, accountable and outward-facing research system. But placing too much emphasis on
narrow, poorly-designed indicators – such as journal impact factors (JIFs) – can have negative
consequences, as reflected by the 2013 San Francisco Declaration on Research Assessment (DORA),
which now has over 570 organisational and 12,300 individual signatories.5 Responses to this review
reflect these possibilities and pitfalls. The majority of those who submitted evidence, or engaged in
other ways, are sceptical about moves to increase the role of metrics in research management.
However, a significant minority are more supportive of the use of metrics, particularly if appropriate
care is exercised in their design and application, and the data infrastructure can be improved.
Peer review, despite its flaws and limitations, continues to command widespread support across
disciplines. Metrics should support, not supplant, expert judgement. Peer review is not perfect, but it
is the least worst form of academic governance we have, and should remain the primary basis for
assessing research papers, proposals and individuals, and for national assessment exercises like the
REF. However, carefully selected and applied quantitative indicators can be a useful complement to
other forms of evaluation and decision-making. One size is unlikely to fit all: a mature research
system needs a variable geometry of expert judgement, quantitative and qualitative indicators.
Research assessment needs to be undertaken with due regard for context and disciplinary diversity.
Academic quality is highly context-specific, and it is sensible to think in terms of research qualities,
rather than striving for a single definition or measure of quality.
Inappropriate indicators create perverse incentives. There is legitimate concern that some
quantitative indicators can be gamed, or can lead to unintended consequences; journal impact factors
and citation counts are two prominent examples. These consequences need to be identified,

4 These are presented in greater detail in Section 10.1 of the main report.
5 www.ascb.org/dora. As of July 2015, only three UK universities are DORA signatories: Manchester, Sussex and UCL.

viii

acknowledged and addressed. Linked to this, there is a need for greater transparency in the
construction and use of indicators, particularly for university rankings and league tables. Those
involved in research assessment and management should behave responsibly, considering and preempting negative consequences wherever possible, particularly in terms of equality and diversity.
Indicators can only meet their potential if they are underpinned by an open and interoperable
data infrastructure. How underlying data are collected and processed – and the extent to which they
remain open to interrogation – is crucial. Without the right identifiers, standards and semantics, we
risk developing metrics that are not contextually robust or properly understood. The systems used by
higher education institutions (HEIs), funders and publishers need to interoperate better, and
definitions of research-related concepts need to be harmonised. Information about research –
particularly about funding inputs – remains fragmented. Unique identifiers for individuals and
research works will gradually improve the robustness of metrics and reduce administrative burden.
At present, further use of quantitative indicators in research assessment and management
cannot be relied on to reduce costs or administrative burden. Unless existing processes, such
as peer review, are reduced as additional metrics are added, there will be an overall increase in
burden. However, as the underlying data infrastructure is improved and metrics become more
robust and trusted by the community, it is likely that the additional burden of collecting and
assessing metrics could be outweighed by the reduction of peer review effort in some areas –
and indeed by other uses for the data. Evidence of a robust relationship between newer metrics
and research quality remains very limited, and more experimentation is needed. Indicators
such as patent citations and clinical guideline citations may have potential in some fields for
quantifying impact and progression.
Our correlation analysis of the REF2014 results at output-by-author level (Supplementary
Report II) has shown that individual metrics give significantly different outcomes from the REF
peer review process, and therefore cannot provide a like-for-like replacement for REF peer
review. Publication year was a significant factor in the calculation of correlation with REF scores,
with all but two metrics showing significant decreases in correlation for more recent outputs. There is
large variation in the coverage of metrics across the REF submission, with particular issues with
coverage in units of assessment (UOAs) in REF Main Panel D (mainly arts & humanities). There is
also evidence to suggest statistically significant differences in the correlation with REF scores for
early-career researchers and women in a small number of UOAs.
Within the REF, it is not currently feasible to assess the quality of UOAs using quantitative
indicators alone. In REF2014, while some indicators (citation counts, and supporting text to
highlight significance or quality in other ways) were supplied to some panels to help inform their
judgements, caution needs to be exercised when considering all disciplines with existing bibliographic

ix

databases. Even if technical problems of coverage and bias can be overcome, no set of numbers,
however broad, is likely to be able to capture the multifaceted and nuanced judgements on the quality
of research outputs that the REF process currently provides.
Similarly, for the impact component of the REF, it is not currently feasible to use quantitative
indicators in place of narrative impact case studies, or the impact template. There is a danger that
the concept of impact might narrow and become too specifically defined by the ready availability of
indicators for some types of impact and not for others. For an exercise like the REF, where HEIs are
competing for funds, defining impact through quantitative indicators is likely to constrain thinking
around which impact stories have greatest currency and should be submitted, potentially constraining
the diversity of the UK’s research base. For the environment component of the REF, there is scope
to enhance the use of quantitative data in the next assessment cycle, provided they are used with
sufficient context to enable their interpretation.
There is a need for more research on research. The study of research systems – sometimes
called the ‘science of science policy’ – is poorly funded in the UK. The evidence to address the
questions that we have been exploring throughout this review remains too limited; but the questions
being asked by funders and HEIs – ‘What should we fund?’ ‘How best should we fund?’ ‘Who should
we hire/promote/invest in?’ – are far from new and can only become more pressing. More investment
is needed as part of a coordinated UK effort to improve the evidence base in this area. Linked to this,
there is potential for the scientometrics community to play a more strategic role in informing how
quantitative indicators are used across the research system, and by policymakers.

Responsible metrics
In recent years, the concept of ‘responsible research and innovation’ (RRI) has gained currency as a
framework for research governance. Building on this, we propose the notion of responsible metrics
as a way of framing appropriate uses of quantitative indicators in the governance, management and
assessment of research. Responsible metrics can be understood in terms of the following dimensions:



Robustness: basing metrics on the best possible data in terms of accuracy and scope;



Humility: recognising that quantitative evaluation should support – but not supplant
– qualitative, expert assessment;



Transparency: keeping data collection and analytical processes open and
transparent, so that those being evaluated can test and verify the results;



Diversity: accounting for variation by field, and using a range of indicators to reflect
and support a plurality of research and researcher career paths across the system;



Reflexivity: recognising and anticipating the systemic and potential effects of
indicators, and updating them in response.

x

Recommendations
This review has identified 20 specific recommendations for further work and action by stakeholders
across the UK research system. These draw on the evidence we have gathered, and should be seen as part
of broader attempts to strengthen research governance, management and assessment which have been
gathering momentum, and where the UK is well positioned to play a leading role internationally. The
recommendations are listed below, with targeted recipients in brackets:
Supporting the effective leadership, governance and management of research
cultures
1

The research community should develop a more sophisticated and nuanced approach to the
contribution and limitations of quantitative indicators. Greater care with language and terminology is
needed. The term ‘metrics’ is often unhelpful; the preferred term ‘indicators’ reflects a recognition that
data may lack specific relevance, even if they are useful overall. (HEIs, funders, managers, researchers)

2

At an institutional level, HEI leaders should develop a clear statement of principles on their
approach to research management and assessment, including the role of quantitative indicators. On
the basis of these principles, they should carefully select quantitative indicators that are appropriate to
their institutional aims and context. Where institutions are making use of league tables and ranking
measures, they should explain why they are using these as a means to achieve particular ends. Where
possible, alternative indicators that support equality and diversity should be identified and included. Clear
communication of the rationale for selecting particular indicators, and how they will be used as a
management tool, is paramount. As part of this process, HEIs should consider signing up to DORA, or
drawing on its principles and tailoring them to their institutional contexts. (Heads of institutions, heads of
research, HEI governors)

3

Research managers and administrators should champion these principles and the use of
responsible metrics within their institutions. They should pay due attention to the equality and
diversity implications of research assessment choices; engage with external experts such as those at the
Equality Challenge Unit; help to facilitate a more open and transparent data infrastructure; advocate the
use of unique identifiers such as ORCID iDs; work with funders and publishers on data interoperability;
explore indicators for aspects of research that they wish to assess rather than using existing indicators
because they are readily available; advise senior leaders on metrics that are meaningful for their
institutional or departmental context; and exchange best practice through sector bodies such as ARMA.
(Managers, research administrators, ARMA)

4

HR managers and recruitment or promotion panels in HEIs should be explicit about the criteria
used for academic appointment and promotion decisions. These criteria should be founded in expert
judgement and may reflect both the academic quality of outputs and wider contributions to policy,
industry or society. Judgements may sometimes usefully be guided by metrics, if they are relevant to the
criteria in question and used responsibly; article-level citation metrics, for instance, might be useful
indicators of academic impact, as long as they are interpreted in the light of disciplinary norms and with
11

due regard to their limitations. Journal-level metrics, such as the JIF, should not be used. (HR managers,
recruitment and promotion panels, UUK)
5

Individual researchers should be mindful of the limitations of particular indicators in the way they
present their own CVs and evaluate the work of colleagues. When standard indicators are inadequate,
individual researchers should look for a range of data sources to document and support claims about the
impact of their work. (All researchers)

6

Like HEIs, research funders should develop their own context-specific principles for the use of
quantitative indicators in research assessment and management and ensure that these are well
communicated, easy to locate and understand. They should pursue approaches to data collection that are
transparent, accessible, and allow for greater interoperability across a diversity of platforms. (UK HE
Funding Bodies, Research Councils, other research funders)

7

Data providers, analysts and producers of university rankings and league tables should strive for
greater transparency and interoperability between different measurement systems. Some, such as
the Times Higher Education (THE) university rankings, have taken commendable steps to be more open
about their choice of indicators and the weightings given to these, but other rankings remain ‘blackboxed’. (Data providers, analysts and producers of university rankings and league tables)

8

Publishers should reduce emphasis on journal impact factors as a promotional tool, and only use
them in the context of a variety of journal-based metrics that provide a richer view of performance.
As suggested by DORA, this broader indicator set could include 5-year impact factor, EigenFactor,
SCImago, editorial and publication times. Publishers, with the aid of Committee on Publication Ethics
(COPE), should encourage responsible authorship practices and the provision of more detailed
information about the specific contributions of each author. Publishers should also make available a range
of article-level metrics to encourage a shift toward assessment based on the academic quality of an article
rather than JIFs. (Publishers)
Improving the data infrastructure that supports research information management

9

There is a need for greater transparency and openness in research data infrastructure. A set of
principles should be developed for technologies, practices and cultures that can support open,
trustworthy research information management. These principles should be adopted by funders, data
providers, administrators and researchers as a foundation for further work. (UK HE Funding Bodies,
RCUK, Jisc, data providers, managers, administrators)

10

The UK research system should take full advantage of ORCID as its preferred system of unique
identifiers. ORCID iDs should be mandatory for all researchers in the next REF. Funders and HEIs
should utilise ORCID for grant applications, management and reporting platforms, and the benefits of
ORCID need to be better communicated to researchers. (HEIs, UK HE Funding Bodies, funders,
managers, UUK, HESA)

12

11

Identifiers are also needed for institutions, and the most likely candidate for a global solution is the
ISNI, which already has good coverage of publishers, funders and research organisations. The use
of ISNIs should therefore be extended to cover all institutions referenced in future REF submissions, and
used more widely in internal HEI and funder management processes. One component of the solution will
be to map the various organisational identifier systems against ISNI to allow the various existing systems
to interoperate. (UK HE Funding Bodies, HEIs, funders, publishers, UUK, HESA)

12

Publishers should mandate ORCID iDs and ISNIs and funder grant references for article
submission, and retain this metadata throughout the publication lifecycle. This will facilitate
exchange of information on research activity, and help deliver data and metrics at minimal burden to
researchers and administrators. (Publishers and data providers)

13

The use of digital object identifiers (DOIs) should be extended to cover all research outputs. This
should include all outputs submitted to a future REF for which DOIs are suitable, and DOIs should also
be more widely adopted in internal HEI and research funder processes. DOIs already predominate in the
journal publishing sphere – they should be extended to cover other outputs where no identifier system
exists, such as book chapters and datasets. (UK HE Funding Bodies, HEIs, funders, UUK)

14

Further investment in research information infrastructure is required. Funders and Jisc should
explore opportunities for additional strategic investments, particularly to improve the interoperability of
research management systems. (HM Treasury, BIS, RCUK, UK HE Funding Bodies, Jisc, ARMA)
Increasing the usefulness of existing data and information sources

15

HEFCE, funders, HEIs and Jisc should explore how to leverage data held in existing platforms to
support the REF process, and vice versa. Further debate is also required about the merits of local
collection within HEIs and data collection at the national level. (HEFCE, RCUK, HEIs, Jisc, HESA,
ARMA)

16

BIS should identify ways of linking data gathered from research-related platforms (including
Gateway to Research, Researchfish and the REF) more directly to policy processes in BIS and
other departments, especially around foresight, horizon scanning and research prioritisation. (BIS, other
government departments, UK HE Funding Bodies, RCUK)
Using metrics in the next REF

17

For the next REF cycle, we make some specific recommendations to HEFCE and the other HE
Funding Bodies, as follows. (UK HE Funding Bodies)
a.

In assessing outputs, we recommend that quantitative data – particularly around published
outputs – continue to have a place in informing peer review judgements of research quality.
This approach has been used successfully in REF2014, and we recommend that it be continued and
enhanced in future exercises.

b.

In assessing impact, we recommend that HEFCE and the UK HE Funding Bodies build on the
analysis of the impact case studies from REF2014 to develop clear guidelines for the use of
13

quantitative indicators in future impact case studies. While not being prescriptive, these
guidelines should provide suggested data to evidence specific types of impact. They should include
standards for the collection of metadata to ensure the characteristics of the research being described
are captured systematically; for example, by using consistent monetary units.
c.

In assessing the research environment, we recommend that there is scope for enhancing the
use of quantitative data, but that these data need to be provided with sufficient context to
enable their interpretation. At a minimum this needs to include information on the total size of the
UOA to which the data refer. In some cases, the collection of data specifically relating to staff
submitted to the exercise may be preferable, albeit more costly. In addition, data on the structure and
use of digital information systems to support research (or research and teaching) may be crucial to
further develop excellent research environments.

Coordinating activity and building evidence
18

The UK research community needs a mechanism to carry forward the agenda set out in this report.
We propose the establishment of a Forum for Responsible Metrics, which would bring together
research funders, HEIs and their representative bodies, publishers, data providers and others to
work on issues of data standards, interoperability, openness and transparency. UK HE Funding
Bodies, UUK and Jisc should coordinate this forum, drawing in support and expertise from other funders
and sector bodies as appropriate. The forum should have preparations for the future REF within its remit,
but should also look more broadly at the use of metrics in HEI management and by other funders. This
forum might also seek to coordinate UK responses to the many initiatives in this area across Europe and
internationally – and those that may yet emerge – around research metrics, standards and data
infrastructure. It can ensure that the UK system stays ahead of the curve and continues to make real
progress on this issue, supporting research in the most intelligent and coordinated way, influencing
debates in Europe and the standards that other countries will eventually follow. (UK HE Funding Bodies,
UUK, Jisc, ARMA)

19

Research funders need to increase investment in the science of science policy. There is a need for
greater research and innovation in this area, to develop and apply insights from computing, statistics,
social science and economics to better understand the relationship between research, its qualities and
wider impacts. (Research funders)

20

One positive aspect of this review has been the debate it has generated. As a legacy initiative, the
steering group is setting up a blog (www.ResponsibleMetrics.org) as a forum for ongoing discussion
of the issues raised by this report. The site will celebrate responsible practices, but also name and
shame bad practices when they occur. Researchers will be encouraged to send in examples of good or bad
design and application of metrics across the research system. Adapting the approach taken by the Literary
Review’s “Bad Sex in Fiction” award, every year we will award a “Bad Metric” prize to the most
egregious example of an inappropriate use of quantitative indicators in research management. (Review
steering group)

14

1. Measuring up
“ The standing of British science, and the individuals and institutions that comprise
it, is rooted firmly in excellence… Much of the confidence in standards of
excellence promoted comes from decisions being informed by peer-review: leading
experts assessing the quality of proposals and work.”
Our Plan for Growth: science and innovation, HM Treasury/BIS, December 20146

“ We have more top ranking universities in London than in any other city in the
world. With 4 universities in the global top 10, we rank second only to the US.”
Jo Johnson MP, Minister for Universities and Science, 1 June 20157
Citations, journal impact factors, h-indices, even tweets and Facebook likes – there are no end of
quantitative measures that can now be used to try to assess the quality and wider impacts of research.
But how robust and reliable are such metrics, and what weight – if any – should we give them in the
future management of research systems at the national or institutional level?
These are questions that have been explored over the past year by the Independent Review of the Role
of Metrics in Research Assessment. The review was announced by David Willetts, then Minister for
Universities and Science, in April 2014, and has been supported by the Higher Education Funding
Council for England (HEFCE).
As the 2014 BIS/HM Treasury science and innovation strategy reminds us, the UK has a remarkable
breadth of excellent research across the sciences, engineering, social sciences, arts and humanities.
These strengths are often expressed in metric shorthand: “with just 3% of global research spending,
0.9% of global population and 4.1% of the world’s researchers, the UK produces 9.5% of article
downloads, 11.6% of citations and 15.9% of the world’s most highly-cited articles”.8
The quality and productivity of our research base is, at least in part, the result of smart management of
the dual-support system of research funding. Since the introduction of the Research Assessment
Exercise (RAE) in 1986, the UK has been through six cycles of evaluation and assessment, the latest
of which was the 2014 Research Excellence Framework (REF2014). Processes to ensure and improve

6 https://www.gov.uk/government/publications/our-plan-for-growth-science-and-innovation
7 Speech to ‘Going Global’ 2015 conference https://www.gov.uk/government/speeches/international-higher-education
8 Elsevier. (2013). International Comparative Performance of the UK Research Base – 2013; A report prepared by Elsevier

for the UK’s Department of Business, Innovation and Skills (BIS), p2.
https://www.gov.uk/government/uploads/system/uploads/attachment_data/file/263729/bis-13-1297-internationalcomparative-performance-of-the-UK-research-base-2013.pdf. Retrieved 1 May 2015.

1

research quality, and more recently its wider impacts, are also used by the UK Research Councils, by
other funders such as the Wellcome Trust, and by universities themselves.
The quality and diverse impacts of research have traditionally been assessed using a combination of
peer review and a variety of quantitative indicators. Peer review has long been the most widely used
method, and underpins the academic system in the UK and around the world. The use of metrics is a
newer approach, but has developed rapidly over the past 20 years as a potential method of measuring
research quality and impact in some fields. How best to do this remains the subject of considerable
debate.
There are powerful currents whipping up the metric tide. These include growing pressures for audit
and evaluation of public spending on higher education and research; demands by policymakers for
more strategic intelligence on research quality and impact; the need for institutions to manage and
develop their strategies for research; competition within and between institutions for prestige,
students, staff and resources; and increases in the availability of real-time ‘big data’ on research
uptake, and the capacity of tools for analysing them.
In a positive sense, wider use of quantitative indicators, and the emergence of alternative metrics for
societal impact, can be seen as part of the transition to a more open, accountable and outward-facing
research system.9 But this has been accompanied by a backlash against the inappropriate weight being
placed on particular indicators – such as journal impact factors (JIFs) – within the research system, as
reflected by the 2013 San Francisco Declaration on Research Assessment (DORA), which now has
over 570 organisational and 12,300 individual signatories.10 As DORA argues, “The outputs from
scientific research are many and varied…Funding agencies, institutions that employ scientists, and
scientists themselves, all have a desire, and need, to assess the quality and impact of scientific outputs.
It is thus imperative that scientific output is measured accurately and evaluated wisely.” 11

1.1.

Our terms of reference

Our work builds on an earlier pilot exercise in 2008 and 2009, which tested the potential for using
bibliometric indicators of research quality in REF2014. At that time, it was concluded that citation
information was insufficiently robust to be used formulaically or as a primary indicator of quality, but
that there might be scope for it to enhance processes of expert review.

9 Royal Society. (2012). Science as an Open Enterprise. The Royal Society Science Policy Centre report 02/12

https://royalsociety.org/~/media/policy/projects/sape/2012-06-20-saoe.pdf. Retrieved 1 June 2015.
10 www.ascb.org/dora. As of June 2015, only three UK universities are DORA signatories: Manchester, Sussex and UCL.
11 Ibid.

2

This review has gone beyond the earlier pilot study to take a deeper and broader look at the potential
uses and limitations of research metrics and indicators. It has explored the use of metrics across
different disciplines, and assessed their potential contribution to the development of research
excellence and impact within higher education. It has also analysed their role in processes of research
assessment, including the next cycle of the REF. And it has considered the changing ways in which
universities are using metrics, particularly the growing power of league tables and rankings. Finally, it
has considered the relationship between the use of indicators and issues of equality and diversity, and
the potential for ‘gaming’ that can arise from the use of particular indicators in systems of funding and
evaluation.
To give structure and focus to our efforts, clear terms of reference were established at the outset. The
review was asked to examine:



The relative merits of different metrics in assessing the academic qualities and
diverse impacts of research;



The advantages and disadvantages of using metrics, compared with peer review, in
creating an environment that enables and encourages excellent research and diverse
impact, including fostering inter- and multidisciplinary research;



How metrics-based research assessment fits within the missions of universities and
research institutes, and the value that they place on published research outputs in
relation to the portfolio of other activities undertaken by their staff, including
training and education;



The appropriate balance between peer review and metrics in research assessment,
and the consequences of shifting that balance for administrative burden and research
cultures across different disciplines;



What is not, or cannot, be measured by quantitative metrics;



The differential impacts of metrics-based assessment on individual researchers,
including the implications for early-career researchers, equality and diversity;



Ethical considerations, and guidance on how to reduce the unintended effects and
inappropriate use of metrics and university league-tables, including the impact of
metrics-based assessment on research culture;



The extent to which metrics could be used in novel ways by higher education
institutions (HEIs) and research funders to support the assessment and management
of research;

3



The potential contribution of metrics to other aspects of research assessment, such as
the matching of reviewers to proposals, or research portfolio analysis;



The use of metrics in broader aspects of government science, innovation and
industrial policy.

Reflecting the evidence we received, this report focuses in greater depth on some aspects of these
terms of reference than others (notably, the use of metrics in the REF, by other funders and in HEI
management). However, we hope that the report provides a clear framework for thinking about the
broader role of metrics, data and indicators within research management, and lays helpful foundations
for further work to be carried out by HEFCE, the Research Councils and others.
The review has been conducted in an open and consultative manner, with the aim of drawing in
evidence, views and perspectives from across the higher education and research system. There has
been a strong emphasis on transparency and plurality throughout the project, and the make-up of the
review’s steering group itself reflects a diversity of disciplines and perspectives. In addition, the group
has engaged actively with stakeholders from across the research community through numerous
workshops, meetings, talks and other channels, including the review’s website and social media.
Papers from steering group meetings have been made publicly available at every stage, as have other
resources, including evidence received and slides presented at workshops.12

1.2.

Definitions and terminology

The research assessment landscape is contested, contentious and complex. Researchers, funders and
managers face an ever-expanding menu of indicators, metrics and assessment methods in operation,
many of which are explored in this review. Some are founded on peer review, others on quantitative
indicators such as citation counts, or measures of input, such as research funding or student numbers.
The term ‘metric’ is itself open to misunderstanding, because something can be a metric in one
context but not in another. For example, the number of citations received by a researcher’s
publications is a citation metric but not an impact metric because it does not directly measure the
impact of that researcher’s work. In other words, it can imply ‘measurement’ of a quantity or quality
which has not in fact been measured. The term indicator is preferable in contexts in which there is the
potential for confusion. To reduce the scope of possible misunderstanding, this report will adopt the
following definitions and terminology throughout.

12 All of this material is available at the review’s website: https://www.hefce.ac.uk/rsrch/metrics/

4

Indicators

A measurable quantity that ‘stands in’ or substitutes for something
less readily measurable and is presumed to associate with it without
directly measuring it. For example, citation counts could be used as
indicators for the scientific impact of journal articles even though
scientific impacts can occur in ways that do not generate citations.
Similarly, counts of online syllabi mentioning a particular book
might be used as an indicator of its educational impact.

Bibliometrics

Bibliometrics focuses on the quantitative analysis of scientific and
scholarly publications, including patents. Bibliometrics is part of the
field of scientometrics: the measurement of all aspects of science and
technology, which may encompass information about any kind of
research output (data, reagents, software, researcher interactions,
funding, research commercialisation, and other outputs).13

Citation impact

The most widely exploited bibliometric relies on counts of citations.
Citation counts are sometimes used as an indicator of academic
impact in the sense that citations from other documents suggest that
the cited work has influenced the citing work in some way.
Bibliometric indicators might normalise these citation counts by
research field and by year, to take into account the very different
citation behaviours between disciplines and the increase in citations
over time. It has to be emphasised that as bibliometrics often do not
distinguish between negative or positive citation, highly cited
literature might attract attention due to controversy or even error.
High numbers of citations might also result from a range of different
contributions to a field e.g. including papers that establish new
methodologies or systematically review the field, as well as primary
research articles.

Alternative or altmetrics

Altmetrics are non-traditional metrics that cover not just citation
counts but also downloads, social media shares and other measures of
impact of research outputs. The term is variously used to mean
‘alternative metrics’ or ‘article level metrics’, and it encompasses
webometrics, or cybermetrics, which measure the features and
relationships of online items, such as websites and log files. The rise
of new social media has created an additional stream of work under

13 Definitions adapted from Encyclopedia of Science Technology and Ethics, 2nd Edition (2014). Macmillan.

5

the label altmetrics. These are indicators derived from social
websites, such as Twitter, Academia.edu, Mendeley, and
ResearchGate with data that can be gathered automatically by
computer programs.
Peer review

A process of research assessment based on the use of expert
deliberation and judgement.14

Academic or scholarly

Academic or scholarly impact is a recorded or otherwise auditable

impact

occasion of influence from academic research on another researcher,
university organisation or academic author. Academic impacts are
most objectively demonstrated by citation indicators in those fields
that publish in international journals.15

Societal impact

As for academic or scholarly impact, though where the effect or
influence reaches beyond scholarly research, e.g. on education,
society, culture or the economy.
Research has a societal impact when auditable or recorded influence
is achieved upon non-academic organisation(s) or actor(s) in a sector
outside the university sector itself – for instance, by being used by
one or more business corporations, government bodies, civil society
organisations, media or specialist/professional media organisations or
in public debate. As is the case with academic impacts, societal
impacts need to be demonstrated rather than assumed. Evidence of
external impacts can take the form of references to, citations of or
discussion of a person, their work or research results.16

REF impact

For the purposes of the REF2014,17 impact was defined as an effect
on, change or benefit to the economy, society, culture, public policy
or services, health, the environment or quality of life, beyond
academia. REF2014 impact includes, but was not limited to, an effect
on, change or benefit to:

14 Adapted from: Council of Canadian Academies. (2012). Informing Research Choices: Indicators and Judgment, p11.

www.scienceadvice.ca/uploads/eng/assessments%20and%20publications%20and%20news%20releases/science%20perform
ance/scienceperformance_fullreport_en_web.pdf. Retrieved 6 December 2014.
15 Taken from LSE Public Policy Group (2011) Maximising the Impacts of Your Research: A Handbook for Social Scientists.

London: PPG. http://blogs.lse.ac.uk/impactofsocialsciences/the-handbook/.
16 Ibid.
17 REF 02. 2011. Assessment framework and guidance on submissions, p26, para 141.

www.ref.ac.uk/media/ref/content/pub/assessmentframeworkandguidanceonsubmissions/GOS%20including%20addendum.p
df. Retrieved 2 April 2015.

6

 the activity, attitude, awareness, behaviour, capacity,
opportunity, performance, policy, practice, process or
understanding

 of an audience, beneficiary, community, constituency,
organisation or individuals
in any geographic location whether locally, regionally, nationally or
internationally.
REF environment

Within REF2014, the research environment was assessed in terms of
its ‘vitality and sustainability’, including its contribution to the
vitality and sustainability of the wider discipline or research base.

REF outputs

Within REF2014, panels assessed the quality of submitted research
outputs in terms of their ‘originality, significance and rigour’, with
reference to international research quality standards.18

1.3.

Data collection and analysis

The review drew on an extensive range of evidence sources, including:



A formal call for evidence

A call for evidence was launched on 1 May 2014, with a response deadline of 30 June 2014.19 The
steering group appealed for evidence from a wide range of sources, including written summaries or
published research. Respondents were asked to focus on four key themes and associated questions, as
follows:
A

Identifying useful metrics for research assessment.

B

How metrics should be used in research assessment.

C

‘Gaming’ and strategic use of metrics.

D

International perspective.

18 Ibid, p23, para 118, notes that permitted ‘types’ of outputs included: Books (or parts of books); Journal articles and

conference contributions; Physical artefacts; Exhibitions and performances; Other documents; Digital artefacts (including
web content); Other.
19 The call for evidence letter is available at:

www.hefce.ac.uk/media/hefce/content/What,we,do/Research/How,we,fund,research/Metrics/Letter-call-for-evidencemetrics-review.pdf

7

In total, 153 responses were received to the call for evidence: 67 from HEIs, 42 from individuals, 27
from learned societies, 11 from publishers and data providers, three from HE mission groups, and
three from other respondents. An analysis of the evidence received can be found at
www.hefce.ac.uk/rsrch/metrics/call/.



A literature review

Two members of the Steering Group, Paul Wouters and Michael Thelwall, researched and wrote a
comprehensive literature review to inform the review’s work. The findings of the literature review
have been incorporated into this report at appropriate points, and the full review is available as
Supplementary Report I.20



Community and stakeholder engagement

The review team engaged actively with stakeholders across the higher education and research
community. These activities included a series of six workshops, organised by the steering group, on
specific aspects of the review, such as the role of metrics within the arts and humanities, and links to
equality and diversity. Members of the steering group also gave talks and presentations about the
work of the review at around 30 conferences, roundtables and workshops. Findings and insights from
these events have been incorporated into the report wherever appropriate. A full itinerary of events
linked to the review can be found in the annex of tables at the end of this report (Table 2).



Media and social media

Over the course of the review, the steering group sought to encourage wider discussion of these issues
in the sector press (particularly Times Higher Education and Research Fortnight) and through social
media. There was extensive use of the #HEFCEmetrics hashtag on Twitter. Members of the steering
group, including Stephen Curry,21 also wrote blog posts on issues relating to the review, and a number
of other blog posts and articles were written in response to the review.22

20 Wouters, P., et al. (2015). Literature Review: Supplementary Report to the Independent Review of the Role of Metrics in

Research Assessment and Management. HEFCE. DOI: 10.13140/RG.2.1.5066.3520.
21 Curry, S. (2014). Debating the role of metrics in research assessment. Blog posted at

http://occamstypewriter.org/scurry/2014/10/07/debating-the-role-of-metrics-in-research-assessment/. Retrieved 1 June 2015.
22 Numerous blog posts, including contributions from steering group members, have been featured at

http://blogs.lse.ac.uk/impactofsocialsciences/2014/04/03/reading-list-for-hefcemetrics/. Retrieved 1 June 2015. We have
referred to some of these posts within this report. Others discussing the review through blog posts include: David
Colquhoun, www.dcscience.net/2014/06/18/should-metrics-be-used-to-assess-research-performance-a-submission-to-hefce/.
Retrieved 1 June 2015. Also see contributors to: http://thedisorderofthings.com/tag/metrics/. Retrieved 1 June 2015.

8



Focus groups with REF2014 panel members

The steering group participated in a series of focus group sessions for REF2014 panel members,
organised by HEFCE, to allow panellists to reflect on their experience, and wider strengths and
weaknesses of the exercise. Specific sessions explored the pros and cons of any uses of metrics within
REF2014, and their potential role in future assessment exercises.



REF2014 evaluations

Where relevant, the steering group also engaged with and analysed findings from HEFCE’s portfolio
of REF2014 evaluation projects, including:



The nature, scale and beneficiaries of research impact: an initial analysis of
REF2014 case studies;23



Preparing impact submissions for REF2014;24



Assessing impact submissions for REF2014;25



Evaluating the 2014 REF: Feedback from participating institutions;26



REF Manager’s report;27



REF panel overview reports;28



REF Accountability Review: costs, benefits and burden project report.29

23 King’s College London and Digital Science. (2015). The nature, scale and beneficiaries of research impact: An initial

analysis of Research Excellence Framework (REF ) 2014 impact case studies.
www.hefce.ac.uk/pubs/rereports/Year/2015/analysisREFimpact/. Retrieved 1 June 2015.
24 Manville, C., Morgan Jones, M, Frearson, M., Castle-Clarke, S., Henham, M., Gunashekar, S. and Grant, J. (2015).

Preparing impact submissions for REF 2014: Findings and Observations. Santa Monica, Calif.: RAND Corporation. RR727-HEFCE.
www.hefce.ac.uk/media/HEFCE,2014/Content/Pubs/Independentresearch/2015/REF,impact,submissions/REF_impact_prep
_process-findings.pdf
25 Manville, C., Guthrie, S., Henham, M., Garrod, B., Sousa, S., Kirtley, A., Castle-Clark, S. and Ling, T. (2015). Assessing

impact submissions for REF2014: An Evaluation. Santa Monica, Calif. RAND Corp.
www.hefce.ac.uk/media/HEFCE,2014/Content/Pubs/Independentresearch/2015/REF,impact,submissions/REF_assessing_im
pact_submissions.pdf
26 HEFCE. (2015). Evaluating the 2014 REF: Feedback from Participating Institutions.

www.hefce.ac.uk/media/HEFCE,2014/Content/Research/Review,of,REF/2014_REF_sector_feedback.pdf
27 HEFCE. (2015). Research Excellence Framework 2014: Manager’s report.

www.ref.ac.uk/media/ref/content/pub/REF_managers_report.pdf. Retrieved 25 May 2015
28 HEFCE’s Panel overview reports can be downloaded from www.ref.ac.uk/panels/paneloverviewreports/
29 Technopolis, 2015.

9



Relating REF2014 outcomes to indicators

A final element of our evidence gathering was designed to assess the extent to which the outcome of
the REF2014 assessment correlated with 15 metrics-based indicators of research performance. For the
first time, we were able to associate anonymised REF authors by paper outputs to a selection of metric
indicators, including ten bibliometric indicators and five alternative metric indicators. Previous
research in this area has been restricted to specific subject areas and departmental level metrics, as the
detailed level of data required for this analysis was destroyed before publication of the REF2014
results. This work is summarised in Chapter 9, and presented in detail in Supplementary Report II.30

1.4.

The structure of this report

This opening chapter has provided a summary of the aims and working methods of the review, and
the range of evidence sources on which this final report draws.
Chapter 2 (The rising tide) gives a brief history of the role of metrics in research management, and
the evolution of data infrastructure and standards to underpin more complex and varied uses of
quantitative indicators. It also surveys the main features of research assessment systems in a handful
of countries: Australia, Denmark, Italy, the Netherlands, New Zealand and the United States.
Chapter 3 (Rough indications) looks in greater detail at the development, uses and occasional abuses
of four categories of quantitative indicators: bibliometric indicators of research quality; alternative
indicators of quality; input indicators; and indicators of impact.
Chapter 4 (Disciplinary dilemmas) maps the diversity in types of research output, publication
practices and citation cultures across different disciplines, and the implications these have for any
attempts to develop standardised indicators across the entire research base. It also considers the extent
to which quantitative indicators can be used to support or suppress multi- or interdisciplinary research.
Chapter 5 (Judgement and peer review) compares the strengths and weaknesses of the peer review
system with metric-based alternatives, and asks how we strike an appropriate balance between
quantitative indicators and expert judgement.
Chapter 6 (Management by metrics) charts the rise of more formal systems of research management
within HEIs, and the growing significance that is being placed on quantitative indicators, both within

30 HEFCE. (2015). Correlation analysis of REF2014 scores and metrics: Supplementary Report II to the Independent Review

of the Role of Metrics in Research Assessment and Management. HEFCE. DOI: 10.13140/RG.2.1.3362.4162.

10

institutions and as a way of benchmarking performance against others. It looks specifically at
university rankings and league tables as a visible manifestation of these trends, and considers how
these might be applied in more responsible ways across the sector.
Chapter 7 (Cultures of counting) assesses the wider effects a heightened emphasis on quantitative
indicators may have on cultures and practices of research, including concerns over systems for
performance management, and negative effects on interdisciplinarity, equality and diversity. It also
considers the extent to which metrics exacerbate problems of gaming and strategic approaches to
research assessment.
Chapter 8 (Sciences in transition) looks beyond HEIs to examine changes in the way key institutions
in the wider research funding system are using quantitative indicators, including the Research
Councils, research charities such as the Wellcome Trust, and the national academies. It also looks to
developments at the European level, within Horizon2020. Finally, it considers how government could
make greater use of available quantitative data sources to inform horizon scanning and policies for
research and innovation.
Chapter 9 (Reflections on REF) provides a detailed analysis of the modest role that quantitative
indicators played in REF2014, and considers a range of scenarios for their use in future assessment
exercises. It also outlines the results of our own quantitative analysis, which correlated the actual
outcomes of REF2014 against 15 metrics-based indicators of research performance.
Finally, Chapter 10 (Responsible metrics) summarises our headline findings, and makes a set of
targeted recommendations to HEIs, research funders (including HEFCE), publishers and data
providers, government and the wider research community. Within a framework of responsible
metrics, the report concludes with clear guidance on how quantitative indicators can be used
intelligently and appropriately to further strengthen the quality and impacts of UK research.

11

2. The rising tide
“ The institutionalization of the citation is the culmination of a decades-long process
starting with the creation of the Science Citation Index. The impact of this
emergence of a new social institution in science and scholarship is often
underestimated…”
Paul Wouters31

“ A timid, bureaucratic spirit has come to suffuse every aspect of intellectual life.
More often than not, it comes cloaked in the language of creativity, initiative and
entrepreneurialism.”
David Graeber32
The quantitative analysis of scientific papers and scholarly articles has been evolving since the early
20th century. Lotka’s Law, dating back to 1926, first highlighted that within a defined area over a
specific period, a low number of authors accounted for a large percentage of publications.33 From this
point, the field of scientometrics34 developed rapidly, especially after the creation of the Science
Citation Index (SCI), and over time we have seen a proliferation of quantitative indicators for
research. This chapter provides a brief history of the use of metrics in research management and
assessment, focusing on bibliometrics, alternative metrics and the role of data providers and data
infrastructure. We then offer a brief outline of research assessment approaches from six countries.

2.1.

Bibliometrics

The SCI was created in 1961, by Eugene Garfield.35 Initially, it was mainly used by scientometric
experts, rather than by the wider research community. In this early stage of scientometrics, data were
generally used to describe the development and direction of scientific research, rather than to evaluate
its quality.

31 Wouters, P. (2014). The Citation: From Culture to Infrastructure. In Cronin, B. and Sugimoto, C. R. (eds.) Beyond

Bibliometrics: Harnessing Multidimensional Indicators of Scholarly Impact. MIT Press.
32

Graeber, D. (2015) The Utopia of Rules: On Technology, Stupidity, and the Secret Joys of Bureaucracy. London: Melville
House.
33 Elsevier (2007). Scientometrics from Past to Present. Research Trends, 1, September 2007.

www.researchtrends.com/issue1-september-2007/sciomentrics-from-past-to-present/. Retrieved 1 March 2015.
34 “Scientometric research [is] the quantitative mathematical study of science and technology, encompassing both

bibliometric and economic analysis.” Ibid.
35 Garfield founded the Institute for Scientific Information (ISI), which is now part of Thomson Reuters.

12

In the 1980s, new approaches to public management, particularly in the UK and US, led to a growing
emphasis on measurable indicators of the value of research. The 1990s gave rise to increasingly
strategic forms of research policy and management, accompanied by greater use of bibliometric
indicators, including JIF scores. These were developed in 1955 by Eugene Garfield, and became
available through Journal Citation Reports from 1975, 36 but were used quite infrequently initially, and
have only seen a real explosion in usage since the 1990s.
Citation analysis has been much more readily available since 2001, when the Web of Science (WoS)
became easily accessible to all, followed by Scopus in 2003 and Google Scholar (GS) in 2004. J.E.
Hirsch invented the Hirsch or h-index in 2005, and this led to a surge of interest in individual level
metrics.

2.2.

Alternative metrics

From the mid-1990s, as advances in information technology created new ways for researchers to
network, write and publish, interest grew in novel indicators better suited to electronic communication
and to capturing impacts of different kinds.37
These alternative metrics include web citations in digitised scholarly documents (e.g. eprints, books,
science blogs or clinical guidelines) and, more recently, altmetrics derived from social media (e.g.
social bookmarks, comments, ratings and tweets). Scholars may also produce and use non-refereed
academic outputs, such as blog posts, datasets and software, where usage-based indicators are still in
the early stages of development. Significant developments in this area include the establishment of
F1000Prime in 2002, Mendeley in 2008 and Altmetric.com in 2011.

2.3.

Approaches to evaluation

Research assessment has traditionally focused on input and output indicators, evaluating academic
impact through bibliometric measures such as citation counts. However, there is now far greater focus
on the wider impacts, outcomes and benefits of research, as reflected in exercises such as REF2014.
The measurement of societal impact, with robust indicators and accurate, comparable data, is still in
its relative infancy.

36 Garfield, E. (2006). The history and meaning of the journal impact factor. Journal of the American Medical Association,

295 (1), 90-93.
37 Ingwersen, P. (1998). The calculation of Web impact factors. Journal of Documentation, 54 (2), 236-243; Borgman, C.,

and Furner, J. (2002). Scholarly communication and bibliometrics. Annual Review of Information Science and Technology,
36. Medford, NJ: Information Today Inc., pp. 3-72; Priem, J., Taraborelli,, D., Groth, P. and Neylon, C. (2010). Altmetrics:
A manifesto, 26 October 2010. http://altmetrics.org/manifesto. Retrieved 1 June 2015.

13

Neither research quality nor its impacts are straightforward concepts to pin down or assess. Differing
views on what they are, and how they can be measured, lie at the heart of debates over research
assessment. In this report, we take research quality to include all scholarly impacts. But what
constitutes quality remains contested.38 As PLOS noted in its submission to this review, “it is unclear
whether any unique quality of research influence or impact is sufficiently general to be measured”.
In the context of research evaluation, quality typically denotes the overall calibre of research based on
the values, criteria or standards inherent in an academic community.39 However, those values and
standards are highly dependent on context: for instance, views vary enormously across and indeed
within certain disciplines, as a result of different research cultures, practices and philosophical
approaches. It is more productive to think in terms of research qualities, rather than striving for a
singular definition.

2.4.

Data providers

As scientometrics has developed, and evaluation systems have become more sophisticated, so the
range of data providers and analysts has grown.40 Those now engaged with the production of
quantitative data and indicators include government agencies at the international, national and local
level, HEIs, research groups, and a wide range of commercial data providers, publishers and
consultants.
Funding agencies in the US, France, UK and the Netherlands were pioneers in using bibliometrics for
research evaluation and monitoring, and the Organisation for Economic Co-operation and
Development (OECD) set global standards for national science and technology indicators in its
Frascati Manual.41
Today, leading universities around the world have adopted, or are in the process of developing,
comprehensive research information systems in which statistical and qualitative evidence of

38 Halevi, G. and Colledge, L. (2014). Standardizing research metrics and indicators- perspectives and approaches. Research

Trends. 39, December 2014. www.researchtrends.com/issue-39-december-2014/standardizing-research-metrics-andindicators/. Retrieved 4 January 2015.
39 Council of Canadian Academies. (2012), p43.
40 Whitley, R. (2010). Reconfiguring the public sciences: the impact of governance changes on authority and innovation in

public science systems, in Reconfiguring knowledge production: changing authority relationships in the sciences and their
consequences for intellectual innovation, edited by R. Whitley et al. Oxford, Oxford University Press.
41

www.oecd.org/innovation/inno/frascatimanualproposedstandardpracticeforsurveysonresearchandexperimentaldevelopment6t
hedition.htm

14

performance in research, teaching, impact and other services can be recorded.42 These include
benchmarking tools such as SciVal and InCites, management systems such as PURE and Converis,
and data consultancy from companies such as Academic Analytics, iFQ, Sciencemetrix and CWTS.
Assisted by reference linking services like CrossRef, these enable users to link sophisticated
bibliometric and other indicator-based analyses with their information infrastructure at all levels, to
monitor institutional, departmental and individual performance. Research funders, such as RCUK, are
also adopting new systems like Researchfish, which gather new information about research progress,
while other funders are using systems such as UberResearch which aggregate existing information
and add value to it.

2.5.

Data infrastructure

Systems for data collection and analysis have developed organically and proliferated over the past
decade. In response to this review, many HEIs noted the burden associated with populating and
updating multiple systems, and the need for more uniform standards and identifiers that could work
across all of them. Others raised concerns that underpinning systems may become overly controlled
by private providers, whose long-term interests may not align with those of the wider research
community.
Underpinning infrastructure has to be fit for the purpose of producing robust and trustworthy
indicators.43 Wherever possible, data systems also need to be open and transparent44 and provide
principles for ‘open’ scholarly infrastructures.45 To produce indicators that can be shared across
platforms, there are a number of prerequisites: unique identifiers; defined data standards; agreed data
semantics; and open data processing methods. These are discussed in turn below. In addition, the
infrastructure must be able to present the relevant suites of indicators to optimise forms of assessment

42

DINI AG Research Information Systems (2015) Research information systems at universities and research
institutions - Position Paper of DINI AG FIS. https://zenodo.org/record/17491/files/DINI_AGFIS_Position_Paper_english.pdf. Retrieved 1 July 2015.
43 Jacso, P. (2006). Deflated, inflated and phantom citation counts. Online Information Review. 30 (3), 297-309; Abramo, G.

and D’Angelo, C. A. (2011). Evaluating research: from informed peer review to bibliometrics. Scientometrics. 87, 499–514.
DOI:10.1007/s11192-011-0352-7.
44 Bilder, G., Lin, J. and Neylon, C. (2015). Principles for Open Scholarly Infrastructure-v1,

http://cameronneylon.net/blog/principles-for-open-scholarly-infrastructures/. Retrieved 1 June 2015.
http://dx.doi.org/10.6084/m9.figshare.1314859
45 Royal Society. (2012). Science as an Open Enterprise. The Royal Society Science Policy Centre report 02/12

https://royalsociety.org/~/media/policy/projects/sape/2012-06-20-saoe.pdf. Retrieved 1 June 2015.

15

that are sensitive to specific research missions and context. They should not ‘black-box’ particular
indicators or present them as relevant for all fields and purposes.

Some key players in research information
Converis (owned by Thomson Reuters) is an integrated research information system. It provides support for
universities, other research institutions and funding offices in collecting and managing data through the research
lifecycle. http://converis.thomsonreuters.com/

CrossRef is a collaborative reference linking service that functions as a sort of digital switchboard. Its specific
mandate is to be the citation linking backbone for all scholarly information in electronic form. It holds no full text
content, but effects linkages through CrossRef Digital Object Identifiers (CrossRef DOI), which are tagged to article
metadata supplied by the participating publishers. www.crossref.org/

Elements (owned by Symplectic) is designed to gather research information to reduce the administrative burden
placed on researchers, and to support research organisation librarians and administrators. http://symplectic.co.uk/

InCites (owned by Thomson Reuters) is a customised, web-based research evaluation tool that allows users to
analyse institutional productivity and benchmark output against peers worldwide, through access to customised citation
data, global metrics, and profiles on leading research institutions. http://researchanalytics.thomsonreuters.com/incites/

PURE (owned by Elsevier) is a research information system. It accesses and aggregates internal and external sources,
and offers analysis, reporting and benchmarking functions. www.elsevier.com/solutions/pure

Researchfish is an online database of outputs reported by researchers linked to awards, now widely used by UK
funding agencies and being taken up by funders in Denmark and Canada. It aims to provide a structured approach to
prospectively capturing outputs and outcomes from as soon as funding starts, potentially to long after awards have
finished. The information is used by funders to track the progress, productivity and quality of funded research, and as a
way of finding examples of impact. https://www.researchfish.com/

SciVal (owned by Elsevier) provides information on the research performance of research institutions across the globe.
This can be used for analysis and benchmarking of performance. www.elsevier.com/solutions/scival

UberResearch provides services aimed at science funders including information tools based on natural language
processing. www.uberresearch.com/

16

2.5.1.

Unique identifiers

In order for an indicator to be reliable, it is important to be able to collect as much as possible of the
underlying data that the indicator purports to represent. For example, if we consider citations to
academic outputs, it is clear that the main databases do not include all possible citations, and that
numbers of citations within them can vary. As PLOS noted in its response to our call for evidence,
‘there are no adequate sources of bibliometric data that are publicly accessible, useable, auditable and
transparent.’
In order to correctly count the number of citations that an article has, all other articles must be
checked to see if they cite the article in question. This can be achieved through manual processes, but
is subject to error. With unique identifiers for articles, the process can be automated (reducing sources
of error to original mis-citation by the author).
The most commonly used identifier is the Digital Object Identifier (DOI).46 While still not universal,
DOIs have gained considerable traction across the sector. For instance, looking at the 191,080 outputs
submitted to REF2014, 149,670 of these were submitted with DOIs (see Supplementary Report II,
Table 1). Use of DOIs varies by discipline, and is still less common in the arts and humanities than in
other areas.
DOIs in themselves are not sufficient for robust metrics. As well as article identifiers, a robust
management and evaluation system needs unique identifiers for journals, publishers, authors and
institutions. This would enable answers to more sophisticated questions, such as: How many articles
has a particular author produced with citations above the average for the journal in question?
Journals have, in general, adopted the International Standard Serial Number (ISSN47) system.
However, there is still a small proportion that have not. Journals which appear in more than one
format (e.g. print and online) will have an ISSN for each media type, but one is the master (ISSN-L),
to which the other ISSNs link.
Publisher and institutional identifiers are more problematic. There are various options for uniquely
identifying organisations. One 2013 study found 22 organisational identifiers currently in use in the
higher education sector in the UK.48 But while none of these is wholly authoritative, both the

46 www.doi.org/
47 www.issn.org/understanding-the-issn/the-issn-international-register/
48 Hammond, M. and Curtis, G. (2013). Landscape study for CASRAI-UK Organisational ID. http://casrai.org/423

17

International Standard Name Identifier (ISNI49) and UK Provider Reference Number (UKPRN50) have
traction. The former is international, and the latter is more UK-centric and does not include funders;
so it would seem that ISNI is the preferred route for developing an authoritative list of publishers.
ORCID (Open Researcher and Contributor ID)
ORCID is a non-proprietary alphanumeric code to uniquely identify academic authors. Its stated aim is to aid "the
transition from science to e-Science, wherein scholarly publications can be mined to spot links and ideas hidden in the
ever-growing volume of scholarly literature". ORCID provides a persistent identity for humans, similar to that created for
content-related entities on digital networks by DOIs.
ORCID launched its registry services and started issuing user identifiers on 16 October 2012. It is now an independent
non-profit organisation, and is freely usable and fully interoperable with other ID systems. ORCID is also a subset of the
International Standard Name Identifier (ISNI). The two organisations are cooperating: ISNI has reserved a block of
identifiers for use by ORCID, so it is now possible for an individual to have both an ISNI and an ORCID.
By the end of 2013 ORCID had 111 member organisations and over 460,000 registrants. As of 1 June 2015, the number
of registered accounts reported by ORCID was 1,370,195. Its organisational members include publishers, such as
Elsevier, Springer, Wiley and Nature Publishing Group, funders, learned societies and universities.
http://orcid.org/

Author identifiers are particularly important, as a particular scholar’s contributions to the scientific
literature can be hard to recognise, as personal names are rarely unique, can change (e.g. through
marriage), and may have cultural differences in name order or abbreviations. Several types of author
identifiers exist, and a detailed analysis of the pros and cons of these was undertaken in 2012 by
Jisc.51 The ORCID system is widely regarded as the best, and uptake of ORCID is now growing
rapidly in the UK and internationally. The same analysis recommended that the UK adopted ORCID,
and many of the key players in the UK research system endorsed this proposal in a joint statement in
January 2013.52 A similar initiative in the US funded by the Alfred P. Sloan Foundation highlighted
the importance of advocacy and improved data quality.53A recent Jisc-ARMA initiative has

49 www.isni.org/
50 https://www.ukrlp.co.uk/
51 JISC Researcher Identifier Task and Finish Group. (2012). Researcher Identifier Recommendations – Sector Validation.

www.serohe.co.uk/wp-content/uploads/2013/10/Clax-for-JISC-rID-validation-report-final.pdf. Retrieved 1 June 2015.
52 Signatories to this joint statement include ARMA, HEFCE, HESA, RCUK, UCISA, Wellcome Trust and Jisc.
53 Brown, J., Oyler, C. and Haak, L. (2015). Final Report: Sloan ORCID Adoption and Integration Program 2013-2014.

http://figshare.com/articles/Final_Report_Sloan_ORCID_Adoption_and_Integration_Program_2013_2014/1290632.
http://dx.doi.org/10.6084/m9.figshare.1290632. Retrieved 25 May 2015.

18

successfully piloted the adoption of ORCID in a number of UK HEIs54, and an agreement negotiated
by Jisc Collections will enable UK HEIs to benefit from reduced ORCID membership costs and
enhanced technical support.55 UK uptake will also be driven by the Wellcome Trust’s decision to
make ORCID iDs a mandatory requirement for funding applications from August 2015,56 and by the
strong support shown by Research Councils UK. ORCID also recently announced an agreement with
ANVUR (National Agency for the Evaluation of University and Research Institutes) and CRUI
(Conference of Italian University Rectors) to implement ORCID on a national scale in Italy.57
For outputs other than journal articles, ISBNs (International Standard Book Numbers)58 for books are
analogous to ISSNs for journals. A longstanding issue here is that different editions (e.g. hardback
and paperback) have different ISBNs, but retailers such as Amazon have made progress in
disambiguating this information.
Funder references are important unique identifiers for contracts between research-performing and
research-funding organisations. This information is required by most funders to be included in
acknowledgement sections within manuscripts submitted for publication. However despite efforts to
encourage standard forms for this acknowledgement,59 there is a need for authoritative sources for
funder names (as with institutional names above), and for authenticating the funding references
(although Europe PubMed Central provides a post-publication grant lookup tool populated by those
agencies that fund it).60
Increasingly, other forms of output, such as datasets and conference proceedings, are issued with
DOIs, or DOIs can be obtained retrospectively, for example through platforms such as ResearchGate.
Similarly DOIs can also resolve to ISBNs.

54 http://orcidpilot.jiscinvolve.org/wp/. ORCID is also discussed in Anstey, A. (2014). How can we be certain who authors

really are? Why ORCID is important to the British Journal of Dermatology. British Journal of Dermatology. 171 (4), 679680. DOI 10.1111/bjd.13381. Also Butler, D. (2012) Scientists: your number is up. Nature, 485, 564, DOI:
10.1038/485564a.
55 http://jisc.ac.uk/news/national-consortium-for-orcid-set-to-improve-uk-research-visibility-and-collaboration-23-jun.

Retrieved 28 June 2015.
56 http://blog.wellcome.ac.uk/2015/06/30/who-are-you-recognising-researchers-with-orcid-identifiers/
57 https://orcid.org/blog/2015/06/19/italy-launches-national-orcid-implementation. Retrieved 28 June 2015.
58 www.isbn.nielsenbook.co.uk/controller.php?page=158#What_is_an_ISBN_
59 www.rin.ac.uk/our-work/research-funding-policy-and-guidance/acknowledgement-funders-journal-articles Retrieved 1

June 2015.
60 http://europepmc.org/GrantLookup/. Retrieved 1 June 2015.

19

Other systems of unique identifiers have been proposed to support the sharing of research equipment61
and to improve the citation of research resources.62

2.5.2.

Defined data standards

Once unique and disambiguated identifiers for objects in the research information arena have been
agreed, the next issue is how to represent them and their associated metadata. Various standards for
data structure and metadata have been proposed over time. Across Europe, one standard for research
information management, the Common European Research Information Format (CERIF), 63 has been
adopted. In 1991 the European Commission recommended CERIF to the member states, and in 2002
handed stewardship of the standard to euroCRIS.64 There have been a number of iterations since
then.65
In 2009, Jisc commissioned a report, Exchanging Research Information in the UK,66 which proposed
the use of CERIF as the UK standard for research information exchange. This was followed by
several Jisc-funded initiatives67 and a further report: Adoption of CERIF in Higher Education
Institutions in the UK68 which noted progress but a lack of UK expertise. The majority of off-the-shelf
research information management systems used in UK HEIs today are CERIF-compliant and able to
exchange data in the agreed format. To date the CERIF standard covers around 300 entities and 2000
attributes, including: people, organisations (and sub units), projects, publications, products,
equipment, funders, programmes, locations, events and prizes, although fully describing research
qualities in this way is an ongoing task.

61 For example, see the N8 Shared Equipment Inventory System www.n8equipment.org.uk/. Retrieved 1 June 2015.
62

Bandrowski, A., Brush, M., Grethe, J.S. et al. The Resource Identification Initiative: A cultural shift in publishing [v1; ref
status: awaiting peer review, http://f1000r.es/5fj] F1000Research 2015, 4:134 (DOI:10.12688/f1000research.6555.1).
Retrieved 1 June 2015.
63 http://eurocris.org/cerif/main-features-cerif
64 EuroCRIS is a not-for-profit association with offices in The Hague, The Netherlands, that brings together experts on

research information in general and research information systems (CRIS) in particular. The organisation has 200+ members,
mainly coming from Europe, but also from some countries outside of Europe. www.eurocris.org/
65 http://eurocris.org/cerif/feature-tour/cerif-16
66 Rogers, N., Huxley, L. and Ferguson, N. (2009). Exchanging Research Information in the UK.

http://repository.jisc.ac.uk/448/1/exri_final_v2.pdf. Retrieved 1 June 2015.
67 Russell, R. (2011). Research Information Management in the UK: Current initiatives using CERIF.

www.ukoln.ac.uk/rim/dissemination/2011/rim-cerif-uk.pdf. Retrieved 1 June 2015.
68 Russell, R. (2012). Adoption of CERIF in Higher Education Institutions in the UK: A landscape study.

www.ukoln.ac.uk/isc/reports/cerif-landscape-study-2012/CERIF-UK-landscape-report-v1.0.pdf. Retrieved 1 June 2015.

20

2.5.3.

Agreed data semantics

An agreed approach to the semantics of data elements is

CASRAI

required to ensure that everyone interprets data in the

The Consortia Advancing Standards in Research

same way. One example is the titles used for academic

Administration Information (CASRAI) is an

staff. In the UK, it might be possible to agree on a

international non-profit organisation dedicated to

standard scale of lecturer, senior lecturer, reader and

reducing the administrative burden on

professor, but this does not translate to other countries

researchers and improving business intelligence

where other titles like ‘associate professor’ are

capacity of research institutions and funders.

commonly used and ‘readers’ are unknown. Clearly the

CASRAI works by partnering with funders,

context is important to the semantics. In order to

universities, suppliers and sector bodies to define

compare research items from different databases, we

a dictionary and catalogue of exchangeable

need to have a standard vocabulary that we can match

business ‘data profiles’. These create an

to, ideally at the international level, or else on a country

interoperable ‘drawbridge’ between collaborating

basis. The Consortia Advancing Standards in Research

organisations and individuals. http://casrai.org/

Administration Information (CASRAI) is an
international non-profit organisation that constructs such dictionaries, working closely with other
standards organisations.

2.5.4.

More than pure semantics

Once all these elements are in place, it is possible to build

Snowball Metrics

robust indicators and metrics. But here again, agreed

Snowball Metrics is a bottom-up academia-

definitions are key. Take the example of proposal success

industry initiative. The universities involved aim

rates. If an institution has submitted ten proposals for

to agree on methodologies that are robustly and

funding and three have been funded, it may claim to have a

clearly defined, so that the metrics they describe

30% success rate. This indicator could be benchmarked

enable the confident comparison of apples with

against other institutions. However, if two of those

apples. These metrics (described by recipes) are

proposals were yet to be reviewed, a three in eight or 37.5%

data source- and system-agnostic, meaning that

success rate could also be claimed. Alternatively, the

they are not tied to any particular provider of data

success rate might be calculated based on the financial value

or tools. The resulting benchmarks between

of applications and awards rather than the number

research-intensive universities provide reliable

submitted, each definition producing potentially different

information to help understand research strengths,

‘success rates’ from the same data.69

and thus to establish and monitor institutional
strategies. www.snowballmetrics.com/

69 Kerridge, S. (2015). Questions of identity. Research Fortnight. 27 May 2015.

https://www.researchprofessional.com/0/rr/news/uk/views-of-the-uk/2015/5/Questions-of-identity.html. Retrieved 1 June
2015.

21

The semantics of any metrics must also be clear and transparent. Progress in this area has been made
by the UK-led Snowball Metrics consortium, which has specified 24 metrics ‘recipes’ to date, in areas
such as publications and citations, research grants, collaboration, and societal impact. Snowball is also
gaining some traction in the USA and Australia.70

2.6.

International perspectives

Although this review has focused on the UK, we have taken a keen interest in how other countries
approach these issues. At several of our workshops and steering group meetings, we heard
presentations and considered questions from international perspectives.71 A handful of the responses
to our call for evidence came from overseas, and our schedule of stakeholder events included
meetings or presentations in Paris, Melbourne, Barcelona and Doha (see Table 2 in the annex).
Dialogue, learning and exchange across different systems are important, and any moves that the UK
makes in respect of greater use of metrics are likely to be watched closely. The UK system continues
to attract the attention of research leaders, managers and policymakers worldwide – particularly since
the introduction of the impact element for REF2014.72 Here we offer a brief outline of some of the
striking features of research assessment in a handful of other countries – Australia, Denmark, Italy,
the Netherlands, New Zealand and the United States – chosen to reflect the diversity of systems in
operation worldwide.

2.6.1.

Australia

The Australian Research Council administers Excellence in Research for Australia (ERA), which
aims to identify and promote excellence in research across Australian HEIs. There is no funding
attached to its outcomes. The first full round of ERA (in 2010-11) was the first time a nationwide

70 For relevant discussion, see US Research Universities Futures Consortium. (2013). The current state and

recommendations for meaningful academic research metrics among American research universities.
www.researchuniversitiesfutures.org/us-research-metrics-working-group-current-state-and-recommendations-oct2013.pdf.
Retrieved 1 March 2015.
71 For example, Clare Donovan presented insights from her research in Australia and elsewhere at our Arts and Humanities

workshop hosted by Warwick University;
www.hefce.ac.uk/media/hefce/content/news/Events/2015/HEFCE,metrics,workshop,Warwick/Donovan.pdf. Donovan also
contributed to one of the Review group’s early steering group meetings. Academic Analytics, who presented at our
workshops in Sheffield and Sussex, discussed their approach and use of data in US and UK contexts.
www.hefce.ac.uk/media/hefce/content/news/Events/2014/Metrics,we,trust/HEFCEMetrics_Olejniczak.pdf.The suppliers
invited to our Sussex workshop, operate at the global level, these being Academic Analytics, Altmetric, PLOS, Snowball
Metrics, Elsevier and The Conversation, Plum Analytics and Thomson Reuters.
72 See relevant discussion on internationalising the REF

www.researchresearch.com/index.php?option=com_news&template=rr_2col&view=article&articleId=1342955. Retrieved 1
June 2015.

22

stocktake of disciplinary strengths had been conducted in Australia. Data submitted by 41 HEIs
covered all eligible researchers and their research outputs.
ERA is based upon the principle of expert review informed by citation-based analysis, with the
precise mix depending on discipline; citations are used for most science, engineering and medical
disciplines, and peer review for others. It aims to be “a dynamic and flexible research assessment
system that combines the objectivity of multiple quantitative indicators with the holistic assessment
provided by expert review….” 73
ERA 201274 evaluations were informed by four broad categories of indicators:



Of research quality: publishing profile, citation analysis, ERA peer review and peer
reviewed research income;



Of research volume and activity: total research outputs, research income and other
items within the profile of eligible researchers;



Of research application: commercialisation income and other applied measures;



Of recognition: based on a range of esteem measures.

Evaluation of the data submitted was undertaken by eight evaluation committees, representing
different disciplinary clusters. The next ERA round will take place in 2015.75

2.6.2.

Denmark

Danish public university funding is allocated according to four parameters: education based on study
credits earned by the institution (45%); research activities measured by external funding (20%);
research activities measured by the ‘BFI’, a metrics-based evaluation system (25%)76; and number of
PhD graduates (10%). The current system was gradually implemented from 2010 to 2012 following
agreement in 2009 to follow a new model. It is primarily a distribution model, based on the Danish
Agency for Science, Technology and Innovation’s count of peer reviewed research publications. The
goal was to allocate an increasing proportion of the available research funding according to the
outcomes of the national research assessment exercise. Given the methodology employed, the BFI has

73 www.arc.gov.au/era/faq.htm#Q6. Retrieved 1 June 2015.
74 www.arc.gov.au/pdf/era12/report_2012/ARC_ERA12_Introduction.pdf
75 Submission guidelines are provided at the following. Australian Research Council (2014) ERA 2015 Submission

Guidelines. www.arc.gov.au/pdf/ERA15/ERA%202015%20Submission%20Guidelines.pdf. These include changes to the
process since 2012, outlined on pp7-9.
76 Veterager Pedersen, C. (2010). The Danish bibliometric research indicator- BFI: Research publications, research

assessment, university funding. ScieCom Info. 4, 1-4.

23

been described as a primarily quantitative distribution system, as opposed to a quality measurement
system.77
Due to the limitations of existing publications databases (see Chapter 3), the Danish government
decided to create its own. This enables the BFI to be defined by Danish researchers, with 67 expert
groups of academics involved in selecting items for inclusion in two authority lists, one of series
(journals, book series or conference series) and one of publishers. These are then ranked each year by
the panels, and this is then used as the basis of a points system for researchers.
The scoring system includes monographs, articles in series and anthologies, doctoral theses and
patents. Peer review is a prerequisite for inclusion on an authoritative list. These lists decide what
publishers and what journals are recognised as being worth to publish in, and what level this
recognition has – Level 1 or Level 2. Level 2 channels generate more points. These lists effectively
decide which publication channels contain serious research. All eligible research outputs can be
attributed BFI-points as they are entered into the system. Different weights are applied for different
sorts of output and publication channel, so the system aims to assess performance and not just volume
of production.

2.6.3.

Italy

In 2013, Italy’s National Agency for the Evaluation of the University and Research Systems
(ANVUR) completed its largest ever evaluation initiative, known as the ‘eValuation of the Quality of
Research’ (VQR), across 95 universities, 12 public research bodies and 16 voluntary organisations.78
The aim was to construct a national ranking of universities and institutes, based on key indicators,
including: research outcomes obtained from 2004 to 2010; ability to attract funding; number of
international collaborations; patents registered; spin-offs; and other third-party activities.
The results of the VQR are being used by the education and research ministry to award €540 million
in ‘prize funds’ from the government’s university budget. The process included the evaluation of
approximately 195,000 publications, using a hybrid approach of two methodologies:



Bibliometric analysis: based on the impact factor (IF) of the journal79 and the
number of citations received in a year, divided by articles published;

77 Ibid.
78 A useful analysis of the VQR is provided by Abramo, G. and D’Angelo, C.A. (2015). The VQR, Italy’s Second National

Research Assessment: Methodological Failures and Ranking Distortions. Journal of the Association for Information, Science
and Technology.
79 For those indexed in Web of Science, or the SCImago Journal Rank for those indexed in Scopus.

24



Peer review: assigned to around 14,000 external reviewers, more than 4,000 of
whom were from outside Italy.

Bibliometric analysis was used in the natural sciences and engineering; whereas for social sciences
and humanities (Panels 10-14), only peer review was used. The overall evaluation of institutions was
based on a weighted sum of various indicators: 50% for the quality of the research products submitted
(for faculty members, the maximum number of products was three); and the remaining 50% based on
a composite score from six indicators. These are: capacity to attract resources (10%); mobility of
research staff (10%); internationalisation (10%); PhD programmes (10%); ability to attract research
funds (5%); and overall improvement from the last VQR (5%). ANVUR used 14 panels to undertake
evaluations, divided by disciplinary area.

2.6.4.

Netherlands

Since 2003, it has been the responsibility of individual Dutch university boards and faculties to
organise research assessment on a six-yearly cycle, in line with a ‘Standard Evaluation Protocol’
(SEP).80 Assessments are made by expert committees, which may use qualitative and quantitative
indicators to score research groups or programmes on a scale. The distribution of government research
funds is not explicitly linked to this assessment process.81
From 2015 onwards, the assessment involves three criteria: quality, societal relevance, and viability. 82
Productivity was previously a criterion, but has now been removed as a goal in itself (and subsumed
under the quality criterion) to put less emphasis on the number of publications and more on their
quality. The review also looks at the quality of PhD training, and management of research integrity
(including how an institution has dealt with any cases of research misconduct). The research unit’s
own strategy and targets are guiding principles for the evaluation. In addition, the evaluation should
provide feedback to the evaluated research institutes and groups on their research agendas for the near
future.

80 The Standard Evaluation Protocol (SEP) was jointly developed by the Royal Netherlands Academy of Arts and Sciences

(KNAW), The Association of Universities in the Netherlands (VSNU) and the Netherlands Organisation for Scientific
Research (NWO). The goal of the SEP is to provide common guidelines for the evaluation and improvement of research and
research policy to be used by university boards, institutes and the expert evaluation committees.
81 Key Perspectives Ltd. (2009). A Comparative Review of Research Assessment Regimes in Five Countries and the Role of

Libraries in the Research Assessment Process: Report Commissioned by OCLC Research.
www.oclc.org/research/publications/library/2009/2009-09.pdf
82 https://www.knaw.nl/nl/actueel/publicaties/standard-evaluation-protocol-2015-2021

25

2.6.5.

New Zealand

New Zealand’s evaluation system is known as the ‘Performance-Based Research Fund’ (PBRF), and
is used to assess the performance of all Tertiary Education Organisations (TEOs). 83 Its four objectives
are: to increase the quality of basic and applied research at degree-granting TEOs; to support worldleading teaching and learning at degree and postgraduate levels; to assist TEOs to maintain and lift
their competitive rankings relative to their international peers; and to provide robust public
information to stakeholders about research performance within and across TEOs.
The PBRF is carried out every six years; most recently in 2012,84 when 27 institutions participated
(eight universities, ten institutes of technology and polytechnics, one wãnanga,85 and eight private
training establishments.) The amount of funding that a participating institution receives is based on
three elements: quality evaluation (55%); research degree completions (25%); and external research
income (20%).
The quality element of the process rests on the submission and evaluation of evidence portfolios.
Twelve specialist peer-review panels assess and evaluate these portfolios with additional advice from
expert advisory groups and specialists as needed.86 The PBRF is unusual in that it takes the individual
(rather than the department or school) as the unit of assessment, so provides very detailed
performance information that can inform strategic planning and resource allocation within
institutions. It does not systematically measure research impacts outside academia.

2.6.6.

United States

The US does not have a centralised national assessment system for its universities and research
institutes; however, in recent years, it has actively supported projects including STAR METRICS
(Science and Technology for America’s Reinvestment: Measuring the Effects of Research, Innovation
and Competitiveness and Science).87 This was launched in 2010 and is led by the National Institute of
Health (NIH), the National Science Foundation (NSF), and the Office of Science and Technology
Policy (OSTP). It aims to create a repository of data and tools to help assess the impact of federal
research investments.

83 www.tec.govt.nz/Funding/Fund-finder/Performance-Based-Research-Fund-PBRF-/. Retrieved 30 March 2015.
84 Details of the 2012 exercises can be downloaded from www.tec.govt.nz/Funding/Fund-finder/Performance-Based-

Research-Fund-PBRF-/quality-evaluation/2012-Quality-Evaluation/
85 In the New Zealand education system, a wānanga is a publicly-owned tertiary education organisation that provides

education in a Mãori cultural context.
86 PBRF Quality evaluation guidance 2012 is provided at www.tec.govt.nz/Documents/Publications/PBRF-Quality-

Evaluation-Guidelines-2012.pdf
87 https://www.starmetrics.nih.gov/

26

STAR METRICS focus at two different levels:



Level I: Developing uniform, auditable and standardised measures of the impact of
science spending on job creation, using data from research institutions’ existing
database records; 88



Level II: Developing measures of the impact of federal science investment on
scientific knowledge (using metrics such as publications and citations), social
outcomes (e.g. health outcomes measures and environmental impact factors),
workforce outcomes (e.g. student mobility and employment), and economic growth
(e.g. tracing patents, new company start-ups and other measures). This is achieved
through the Federal RePORTER89 tool, thus developing an open and automated data
infrastructure that will enable the documentation and analysis of a subset of the
inputs, outputs, and outcomes resulting from federal investments in science.

The STAR METRICS project involves a broad consortium of federal R&D funding agencies with a
shared vision of developing data infrastructures and products to support evidence-based analyses of
the impact of research investment.90 It aims to utilise existing administrative data from federal
agencies and their grantees, and match them with existing research databases of economic, scientific
and social outcomes. It has recently been announced that from 2016 onwards resources will be
redirected away from STAR METRICS data scraping to focus on the RePORTER tool, which has
similarities to the UK Gateway to Research approach.91

2.7.

Adding it up

As these snapshots reveal, the ways that metrics and indicators are conceived and used varies by
country, often significantly. The nature of the assessment approach, and the choice, use and relative
importance of particular indicators, reflect particular policies, and usually involve compromises
around fairness across disciplines, robustness, administrative and/or cost burdens and sector buy in.

88 STAR METRICS will be discontinuing Level I activities as of 1 January 2016.
89 http://federalreporter.nih.gov
90 But not all funders are involved, e.g. the National Endowment for the Humanities.
91 http://gtr.rcuk.ac.uk/

27

Two recent studies provide further discussion of how national approaches differ:



A 2012 report by the Council of Canadian Academies looks at the systems used in
10 different countries.92 It emphasises the importance of national research context in
defining a given research assessment, underlining that no single set of indicators for
assessment will be ideal in all circumstances. The report also highlights a global
trend towards national research assessment models that incorporate both quantitative
indicators and expert judgment.



A 2014 study by Technopolis examined 12 EU member states and Norway.93 This
includes a comparative consideration of systems using performance-based research
funding (PRF systems). The report shows that Czech Republic is the only country
that limits the indicators used to the output of research, (even though it is the PRF
system that covers research and innovation-related outputs in the most detailed and
comprehensive manner). In a second group of countries – Denmark, Finland,
Norway (PRI), Belgium/PL (BOF), Norway (HEI) and Sweden – the PRFs include
both output and systemic indicators; (in Denmark, Finland and Norway this includes
indicators related to innovation-oriented activities). Only a few countries also
examine research impacts: Italy, UK (REF), France (AERES) and Belgium/FL
(IOF). While the PRFs in France and Belgium focus on impacts in the spheres of
research and innovation, Italy and the UK also consider societal impacts.

It is valuable to learn from the approaches being used by different countries, particularly as research
and data infrastructure are increasingly global. However, context is also crucial to good assessment,
and there will be elements that are specific to the design, operation and objectives of the UK system.
Overall though, we are likely to see greater harmonisation of approaches, certainly across EU member
states. Recent initiatives, such as the 2014 ‘Science 2.0’ White Paper from the European Commission
point towards a more integrated architecture for research funding, communication, dissemination and
impact. The UK has been at the forefront of these debates since the 1980s, and over that same period
its research system, across many indicators, has grown significantly in strength. Ensuring that the UK
is positioned well for the next wave of change in how the research system operates – in terms of data

92 Council of Canadian Academies (2012) work included analysis of research assessment systems employed in ten countries

including Australia, China, Finland, Germany, the Netherlands, Norway, Singapore, South Korea, USA and the UK.
93 Technopolis. (2014). Measuring scientific performance for improved policy making.

www.europarl.europa.eu/RegData/etudes/etudes/join/2014/527383/IPOL-JOIN_ET(2014)527383(SUM01)_EN.pdf
Published for the European Parliamentary Research Service. This examined Norway, Sweden, the UK, Spain, France,
Belgium/FL, Italy, Czech Republic, Denmark, the Netherlands, Slovakia, Austria and Finland. A third report published in
2010, by the expert group on assessment in university-based research (AUBR), provided case studies of 16 different
countries, which again represent a breadth of approaches and objectives: http://ec.europa.eu/research/sciencesociety/document_library/pdf_06/assessing-europe-university-based-research_en.pdf.

28

infrastructure, standards and systems of assessment – is a vital part of our overall leadership in
research. Moves by HEFCE to explore the potentially increased internationalisation of research
assessment are to be welcomed, although such steps are not without strategic and operational
challenges. Proceeding cautiously, in an exploratory way, seems an appropriate approach.

29

3. Rough indications
“ ‘The answer to the Great Question of Life, the Universe and Everything is… fortytwo’, said Deep Thought, with infinite majesty and calm.”
Douglas Adams, The Hitchhiker’s Guide to the Galaxy
Having charted the development of research metrics and indicators and their usage internationally,
this chapter turns the focus on their application. It looks in detail at the current development, uses and
occasional abuses of four broad categories of indicator: bibliometric indicators of quality (3.1);
alternative indicators (3.2); input indicators (3.3); and indicators of impact (3.4).

3.1.

Bibliometric indicators of quality

The most common approaches to measuring research quality involve bibliometric methods, notably
weighted publication counts; and citation-based indicators, such as the JIF or h-index. As the
Canadian Council of Academies report states: “Bibliometric indicators are the paradigmatic
quantitative indicators with respect to measurement of scientific research.” 94
This section gives a brief overview of the technical possibilities of bibliometric indicators. Many
points raised here are addressed in greater detail in our literature review (Supplementary Report I),
reflecting the breadth of existing literature on citation impact indicators, the use of scientometric
indicators in research evaluation95, and in measuring the performance of individual researchers96.
Several considerations need to be borne in mind when working with bibliometric analyses, including:
differences between academic subjects/disciplines; coverage of sources within databases; the selection
of the appropriate unit of analysis for the indicator in question; the question of credit allocation where
outputs may include multiple authors, and accounting for self-citations.

3.1.1.

Bibliographic databases

The three most important multidisciplinary bibliographic databases are Web of Science, Scopus, and
Google Scholar. Scopus has a broader coverage of the scholarly literature than Web of Science. Some
studies report that journals covered by Scopus but not by Web of Science tend to have a low citation
impact and tend to be more nationally oriented, suggesting that the most important international

94 Council of Canadian Academies. (2012), pp53-54.
95 Vinkler, P. (2010). The evaluation of research by scientometric indicators. Oxford, Chandos Publishing.
96 Wildgaard, L., Schneider, J. W. and Larsen, B. (2014). A review of the characteristics of 108 author-level bibliometric

indicators. Scientometrics. 101 (1), 125-158.

30

academic journals are usually covered by both databases. Certain disciplines, especially the Social
Sciences and Humanities (SSH) create special challenges for bibliometric analyses.97 Google Scholar
is generally found to outperform both Web of Science and Scopus in terms of its coverage of the
literature. However, there are a few fields, mainly in the natural sciences, in which some studies have
reported the coverage of Google Scholar to be worse than the coverage of Web of Science and
Scopus. On the other hand, the coverage of Google Scholar has been improving over time, so it is not
clear the same still applies today.

3.1.2.

Basic citation impact indicators

A large number of citation impact indicators have been proposed in the literature. Most of these
indicators can be seen as variants or extensions of a limited set of basic indicators: the total and the
average number of citations of the publications of a research unit (e.g. of an individual researcher, a
research group, or a research institution); the number and the proportion of highly cited publications
of a research unit; and a research unit’s h-index. There is criticism in the literature of the use of
indicators based on total or average citation counts. Citation distributions tend to be highly skewed,
and therefore the total or the average number of citations of a set of publications may be strongly
influenced by one or a few highly cited publications (‘outliers’). This is often considered undesirable.
Indicators based on the idea of counting highly cited publications are suggested as a more robust
alternative to indicators based on total or average citation counts.

3.1.3.

Exclusion of specific types of publications and citations

When undertaking bibliometric analyses, one needs to decide which types of publications and
citations are included and which are not. In Web of Science and Scopus, each publication has a
document type. It is clear that research articles, which simply have the document type ‘article’, should
be included in bibliometric analyses. However, publications of other document types, such as
‘editorial material’, ‘letter’, and ‘review’ may be either included or excluded.
Most bibliometric researchers prefer to exclude author self-citations from bibliometric analyses. There
is no full agreement in the literature on the importance of excluding these citations. In some
bibliometric analyses, the effect of author self-citations is very small, suggesting that there is no need
to exclude these citations. In general, however, it is suggested that author self-citations should
preferably be excluded, at least in analyses at low aggregation levels, for instance at the level of
individual researchers. However, as self-citation is a common and acceptable practice in some

97 See Sections 1.1 and 1.4.1 of the literature review (Supplementary Report I).

31

disciplines but frowned upon in others, choosing to exclude them will affect some subject areas more
than others.

3.1.4.

Normalisation of citation impact indicators

In research assessment contexts, there is often a requirement to make comparisons between
publications from different fields. There is agreement in the literature that citation counts of
publications from different fields should not be directly compared with each other, because there are
large differences among fields in the average number of citations per publication. Researchers have
proposed various approaches to normalise citation impact indicators for differences between field,
between older and more recent publications, and between publications of different types.
Most attention in the literature has been paid to normalised indicators based on average citation
counts. Recent discussions focus on various technical issues in the calculation of these indicators, for
instance whether highly cited publication indicators count the proportion of the publications of a
research unit that belong to the top 10% or the top 1% of their field, and more sophisticated variants
thereof, including the position of publications within the citation distribution of their field.
A key issue in the calculation of normalised citation impact indicators is the way in which the concept
of a research field is operationalised. The most common approach is to work with the predefined
fields in a database such as Web of Science, but this approach is heavily criticised. Some researchers
argue that fields may be defined at different levels of aggregation and that each aggregation level
offers a legitimate but different viewpoint on the citation impact of publications. Other researchers
suggest the use of disciplinary classification systems (e.g. Medical Subject Headings or Chemical
Abstracts sections) or sophisticated computer algorithms to define fields, typically at a relatively low
level of aggregation. Another approach is to calculate normalised citation impact indicators without
defining fields in an explicit way. This idea is implemented in so-called ‘citing-side normalisation’
approaches, which represent a recent development in the literature.

3.1.5.

Considerations of author position on scholarly published work

In the absence of other reliable indicators of research contribution or value, the contribution of a
particular researcher to a piece of scholarly published work has been estimated by consideration of the
inclusion of a researcher as a listed author on published work – and the relative position in the list.
However, the average number of authors of publications in the scholarly literature continues to
increase, partly due to the pressure to publish to indicate research progression and also due to a trend,
in many disciplines, toward greater collaboration and ‘team science’98. Research in many disciplines

98 An extreme case is the recent physics paper with more than 5,000 authors, as discussed at: www.nature.com/news/physics-

paper-sets-record-with-more-than-5-000-authors-1.17567. Retrieved 1 June 2015.

32

is increasingly collaborative, and original research papers with a single author are – particularly in the
natural sciences – becoming rarer.
This trend makes it increasingly difficult to determine who did what, and who had a particularly
pivotal role or contribution, to scholarly published work. It is currently difficult to decipher individual
contributions by consulting the author lists, acknowledgements or contributions sections of most
journals; and the unstructured information is difficult to text-mine.
There has been a mixture of approaches to identifying contributions of ‘authors’. One example works
on the assumption that any listing of an author is valuable, known as ‘full counting’. The citations to a
multi-author publication are counted multiple times, once for each of the authors, even for authors
who have made only a small contribution. Because the same citations are counted more than once, the
full counting approach has a certain inflationary effect, which is sometimes considered undesirable. A
number of alternative credit allocation approaches have therefore been proposed, including the
fractional counting approach, where the credit for a publication is divided equally among all authors.
Another approach frequently used as short-hand is to assume that the first and/or last authors in a list
have played the most pivotal role in the production of the scholarly outputs. However this does not
apply across disciplines (e.g. economics and high energy physics where author-listing protocols are
frequently alphabetical). An alternative possibility is to fully allocate the credits of a publication to the
corresponding author instead of the first author. A final approach discussed in the literature is to
allocate the credits of a publication to the individual authors in a weighted manner, with the first
author receiving the largest share of the credits, the second author receiving the second-largest share,
and so on.
Developments in digital technology present opportunities to address the challenge of deriving
contributions to published work. A collaboration between the Evaluation team at the Wellcome Trust,
Harvard University and Digital Science has made steps to address this challenge by working across
the research community to develop a simply structured taxonomy of contributions to scholarly
published work which capture what has traditionally been masked as ‘authorship’. The taxonomy is
currently being trialled within publishing manuscript submissions systems and by several
organisations interested to help research gain more visibility around the work that they do.99 The UK’s
Academy of Medical Sciences is also exploring how enabling greater visibility and credit around

99 See http://credit.casrai.org/

33

contributions to research might help to incentivise, encourage and sustain ‘team science’ in disciplines
where this is highly valuable.100
For researchers, the ability to better describe what they contributed would be a more useful currency
than being listed as a specific ‘author number’. Researchers could draw attention to their specific
contributions to published work to distinguish their skills from those of collaborators or competitors,
for example during a grant-application process or when seeking an academic appointment. This could
benefit junior researchers in particular, for whom the opportunities to be a ‘key’ author on a paper can
prove somewhat elusive. Methodological innovators would also stand to benefit from clarified roles –
their contributions are not reliably apparent in a conventional author list. It could also facilitate
collaboration and data sharing by allowing others to seek out the person who provided, for example,
an important piece of data or statistical analysis.
Through the endorsement of individuals’ contributions, researchers could move beyond ‘authorship’
as the dominant measure of esteem. For funding agencies, better information about the contributions
of grant applicants would aid the decision-making process. Greater precision could also enable
automated analysis of the role and potential outputs of those being funded, especially if those
contributions were linked to an open and persistent researcher profile or identifier. It would also help
those looking for the most apt peer reviewers. For institutions, understanding a researcher’s
contribution is fundamental to the academic appointment and promotion process.

3.1.6.

Indicators of the citation impact of journals

The best-known indicator of the citation impact of journals is the JIF. This is an annual calculation of
the mean number of citations to articles published in any given journal in the two preceding years.101
There is a lot of debate about the JIF, both regarding the way in which it is calculated (which skews
the JIF towards a minority of well-cited papers)102 and the way in which it is used in research
assessment contexts (as discussed more in Chapter 7).
Various improvements of and alternatives to the JIF have been proposed in the literature. It is for
instance suggested to take into account citations during a longer time period, possibly adjusted to the
specific citation characteristics of a journal, or it is proposed to consider the median instead of the

100 www.acmedsci.ac.uk/policy/policy-projects/team-science/
101 Curry, S. (2012). Sick of impact factors. Post on Reciprocal Space blog.

http://occamstypewriter.org/scurry/2012/08/13/sick-of-impact-factors/. Retrieved 1 June 2015.
102 Seglen, P. (1992). The skewness of science. Journal of the Association for Information Science and Technology. 43, 628–

638. DOI: 10.1002/(SICI)1097-4571(199210)43:9<628::AID-ASI5>3.0.CO;2-0.

34

average number of citations of the publications in a journal. Another suggestion is to calculate an hindex for journals as an alternative or complement to the JIF.
Researchers also argue that citation impact indicators for journals need to be normalised for
differences in citation characteristics among fields. A number of normalisation approaches have been
suggested, such as the SNIP indicator available in Scopus.103
Another idea proposed in the literature is that in the calculation of citation impact indicators for
journals more weight should be given to citations from high-impact sources, such as citations from
Nature and Science, than to citations from low-impact sources, for instance from a relatively unknown
national journal that receives hardly any citations itself. This principle is implemented in the
EigenFactor and article influence indicators reported, along with the JIF, in the Journal Citation
Reports. The same idea is also used in the SJR indicator included in Scopus.104
The JIF and other citation impact indicators for journals are often used not only in the assessment of
journals as a whole but also in the assessment of individual publications in a journal. Journal-level
indicators then serve as a substitute for publication-level citation statistics. The use of journal-level
indicators for assessing individual publications is rejected by many bibliometricians. It is argued that
the distribution of citations over the publications in a journal is highly skewed, which means that the
JIF and other journal-level indicators are not representative of the citation impact of a typical
publication in a journal. However, some bibliometricians agree with the use of journal-level indicators
in the assessment of very recent publications. In the case of these publications, citation statistics at the
level of the publication itself provide hardly any information.

3.1.7.

Future developments

RCUK has extended its bibliometric analysis beyond an examination of citation counts, having an
interest in the qualities of the literature that cites RCUK-funded research and the qualities of the
literature cited by RCUK-funded research. RCUK has obtained this data from Thomson Reuters,
drawn from Web of Science. Using this approach, it is possible to analyse the body of knowledge that
authors draw upon, and also the diversity of research fields that subsequently draws on these results.
This quantification of the ‘diffusion of ideas’ and mapping of the distance between research subject

103 According to its provider, “SNIP corrects for differences in citation practices between scientific fields, thereby allowing

for more accurate between-field comparisons of citation impact.” www.journalindicators.com/
104 www.scimagojr.com/

35

areas has been pioneered by Rafols et al. and has contributed to the discussion of how to measure
interdisciplinary research.105
Another area that is developing fast is analysis of the influence of a given work within a particular
network. In the area of citations this is exemplified by the EigenFactor.106 In social media analyses the
concept of reach or page impressions can be more informative than simple counts. Within this
network conception of the spread of knowledge and ideas it is also possible to use knowledge of the
types of connections. Once again this is illustrated by citations in analyses that categorise citations
into types by both function (citing an idea, data) and sentiment (agree or disagree). These much richer
indicators will make it possible to track and understand the way that research outputs spread and
influence activities ranging from further research to public discussion of policy.107

3.2.

Alternative indicators

Here we consider the more influential of the alternative indicators now in circulation, many of which
are discussed in more detail in Section 3 of our literature review (Supplementary Report I).
Throughout this section, we generally treat alternative indicators in relation to their potential to
indicate scholarly impacts, but in some cases, we also cover wider impacts as well. Table 3 in the
annex provides a summary of key alternative indicators.
The most common method to help assess the value of altmetrics is to investigate their correlation with
citations, despite the hope that they may indicate different aspects of scholarly impact. This is because
it would be strange for two valid impact indicators, no matter how different, to be completely
uncorrelated.

3.2.1.

Open access scholarly databases

The internet now contains a range of websites hosting free general scholarly databases, such as
Google Scholar (discussed above in 3.1.1) and Google Books, as well as institutional and subject
repositories, some of which form new sources of citation or usage data. These inherit many of the
strengths and limitations of traditional bibliometric databases, but with some important differences.

105 Rafols, I., Porter, A.L. and Leydesdorff, L. (2010). Science overlay maps: A new tool for research policy and library

management. Journal of the American Society for Information Science and Technology. 61(9), 871–1887.
106 See www.eigenfactor.com
107 Shotton, D., Portwin, K., Klyne, G. and Miles, A. (2009). Adventures in Semantic Publishing: Exemplar Semantic

Enhancements of a Research Article. PLOS Comput Biol. 5(4). e1000361. DOI:10.1371/journal.pcbi.1000361; Shotton, D.
(2010). Introducing the Semantic Publishing and Referencing (SPAR) Ontologies. Post on Open Citations and Related Work
blog. https://opencitations.wordpress.com/2010/10/14/introducing-the-semantic-publishing-and-referencing-spar-ontologies/.
Retrieved 1 June 2015; Moed, H. and Halevi, G. (2014). Research assessment: Review of methodologies and approaches.
Research Trends. 36, March 2014. www.researchtrends.com/issue-36-march-2014/research-assessment/. Retrieved 1 June
2015.

36

Although Google Scholar was not primarily developed to rival conventional citation indexes, many
studies have now compared it with them for research assessment, as covered by Appendix A of the
literature review (Supplementary Report I).

3.2.2.

Usage indicators from scholarly databases

Usage data is a logical choice to supplement citation counts and digital readership information can be
easily and routinely collected, except for paper copies of articles. Bibliometric indicators do not show
the usage of a published work by non-authors, such as students, some academics, and non-academic
users who do not usually publish but may read scholarly publications. Usage-based statistics for
academic publications may therefore help to give a better understating of the usage patterns of
documents and can be more recent than bibliometric indicators.
Many studies have found that correlations between usage and bibliometric indicators for articles and
usage data could be extracted from different sources such as publishers, aggregator services, digital
libraries and academic social websites. Nonetheless, the usage statistics could be inflated or
manipulated and some articles may be downloaded or printed but not read or may be read offline or
via different websites such as authors’ CVs and digital repositories.108 Integrated usage statistics from
different sources such as publishers’ websites, repositories and academic social websites would be
optimal for global usage data if they are not manipulated in advance. However, this does not seem to
be practical at present because of differences in how they are collected and categorised.

3.2.3.

Citations and links from the general web

It is possible to extract information from the web in order to identify citations to publications, hence
using the web as a huge and uncontrolled de-facto citation database. This data collection can be
automated, such as through the Bing API, making the web a practical source of this type of citation
data. Web and URL citations to publications can be located by commercial search engines (Google
manually and Bing automatically) from almost any type of online document, including blog posts,
presentations, clinical guidelines, technical reports or document files (e.g. PDF files) and there is
evidence (although not recent) that they can be indicators of research impact. In theory, then, web and
URL citations could be used to gather evidence about the scholarly impact of research if they were
filtered to remove non-scholarly sources. In contrast, unfiltered web or URL citation counts are easy
to manipulate and many citations are created for navigation, self-publicity or current awareness and so
it does not seem likely that they would genuinely reflect the wider impacts of research, without timeconsuming manual filtering out of irrelevant sources.

108 Thelwall, M. (2012). Journal impact evaluation: A webometric perspective. Scientometrics, 92(2), 429-441.

37

In addition to searching for citations from the general web, citations can be counted from specific
parts of the web, including types of website and types of document. This information can be extracted
from appropriate searches in commercial search engines and automated, for example via the Bing
API. The discussions below cover online presentations, syllabi and science blogs, although there is
also some evidence that mentions in news websites and discussion forums may also be useful.109
Citations from online ‘grey’ literature seem to be an additional useful source of evidence of the wider
impact of research,110 but there do not seem to be any systematic studies of these.
Statistics about the uptake of academic publications in academic syllabi may be useful in teachingoriented and book-based fields, where the main scholarly outputs of teaching staff are articles or
monographs for which students are an important part of the audience, or textbooks. It is practical to
harvest such data from the minority of syllabi that have been published online in the open web and
indexed by search engines, but it seems that such syllabus mentions may be useful primarily to
identify publications with a particularly high educational impact rather than for the systematic
assessment of the educational impact of research. Syllabus mentions have most potential for the
humanities and social sciences, where they are most common and where educational impact may be
most important.
Research may be cited and discussed in blogs by academics or non-academics in order to debate with
or inform other academics or a wider audience. Blog citations can perhaps be considered as evidence
of a combination of academic interest and a potential wider social interest, even if the bloggers
themselves tend to be academics. In addition, the evidence that more blogged articles are likely to
receive more formal citations shows that blog citations could be used for early impact evidence.
Nevertheless, blog citations can be easy to manipulate, and are not straightforward to collect, so may
need to be provided by specialist altmetric software or organisations.
In addition to the types of web citations discussed above, preliminary research is evaluating online
clinical guidelines, government documents and encyclopaedias. Online clinical guidelines could be
useful for medical research funders to help them to assess the societal impact of individual studies.111

109 Costas, R., Zahedi, Z. and Wouters, P. (2014). Do altmetrics correlate with citations? Extensive comparison of altmetric

indicators with citations from a multidisciplinary perspective. arXiv preprint arXiv:1401.4321; Thelwall, M., Haustein, S.,
Larivière, V. and Sugimoto, C. (2013). Do altmetrics work? Twitter and ten other candidates. PLOS ONE, 8(5), e64841.
DOI:10.1371/journal.pone.0064841.
110 Wilkinson, D., Sud, P. and Thelwall, M. (2014). Substance without citation: Evaluating the online impact of grey

literature. Scientometrics. 98(2), 797-806.
111 For a discussion of issues see Manchikanti, L., Benyamin, R., Falco, F., Caraway, D., Datta, S. and Hirsch, J. (2012).

Guidelines warfare over interventional techniques: is there a lack of discourse or straw man? Pain Physician, 15, E1-E26;
also Kryl, D., Allen, L., Dolby, K., Sherbon, B., and Viney, I. (2012). Tracking the impact of research on policy and
practice: investigating the feasibility of using citations in clinical guidelines for research evaluation. BMJ Open, 2(2),
e000897. DOI:10.1136/bmjopen-2012-000897.

38

In support of this, one study extracted 6,128 cited references from 327 documents produced by the
National Institute of Health and Clinical Excellence (NICE) in the UK, finding articles cited in
guidelines tend to be more highly cited than comparable articles.112

3.2.4.

Altmetrics: citations, links, downloads and likes from social
websites

The advent of the social web has seen an explosion in both the range of indicators that could be
calculated as well as the ease with which relevant data can be collected (even in comparison to web
impact metrics). Of particular interest are comments, ratings, social bookmarks, and microblogging,113
although there have been many concerns about validity and the quality of altmetric indicators due to
the ease with which they can be manipulated.114 Elsevier (via Scopus), Springer, Wiley, BioMed
Central, PLOS and Nature Publishing Group have all added article-level altmetrics to their journals,
and uptake is rising among other publishers.
Although the term ‘altmetrics’ refers to indicators for research assessment derived from the social
web,115 the term alternative metrics seems to be gaining currency as a catch-all for web-based metrics.
A range of altmetrics have been shown to correlate significantly and positively with bibliometric
indicators for individual articles,116 giving evidence that, despite the uncontrolled nature of the social
web, altmetrics may be related to scholarly activities in some way.117 This is perhaps most evident

112 Thelwall, M., and Maflahi, N. (in press). Guideline references and academic citations as evidence of the clinical value of

health research. Journal of the Association for Information Science and Technology.
www.scit.wlv.ac.uk/~cm1993/papers/GuidelineMetricsPreprint.pdf
113 For instance: Taraborelli, D. (2008). Soft peer review: Social software and distributed scientific evaluation. Proceedings

of the Eighth International Conference on the Design of Cooperative Systems. Carry–Le–Rouet, 20–23
May. http://nitens.org/docs/spr_coop08.pdf; Neylon, C. and Wu. S. (2009). Article-level metrics and the evolution of
scientific impact. PLOS Biol 7(11). DOI: 10.1371/journal.pbio.1000242; Priem, J., and Hemminger, B. M. (2010).
Scientometrics 2.0: Toward new metrics of scholarly impact on the social web. First Monday, 15(7).
http://firstmonday.org/ojs/index.php/fm/article/view/2874/2570
114 Birkholz, J., and Wang, S. (2011). Who are we talking about?: the validity of online metrics for commenting on science.

Paper presented in: altmetrics11: Tracking scholarly impact on the social Web. An ACM Web Science Conference 2011
Workshop, Koblenz (Germany), 14-15. http://altmetrics.org/workshop2011/birkholz-v0; Rasmussen, P. G., and Andersen,
J.P. (2013). Altmetrics: An alternate perspective on research evaluation. Sciecom Info. 9(2).
http://journals.lub.lu.se/index.php/sciecominfo/article/view/7292/6102
115 Priem, J., Taraborelli, D., Groth, P., and Neylon, C. (2010). Altmetrics: A manifesto. Retrieved from

http://altmetrics.org/manifesto/
116 Priem, J., Piwowar, H., and Hemminger, B. (2012). Altmetrics in the wild: Using social media to explore scholarly

impact. Retrieved from http://arXiv.org/html/1203.4745v1; Thelwall, M., Haustein, S., Larivière, V., and Sugimoto, C.
(2013). Do altmetrics work? Twitter and ten other candidates. PLOS ONE. 8(5), e64841.
DOI:10.1371/journal.pone.0064841; Costas, R., Zahedi, Z., and Wouters, P. (2014).
117 However, recent research suggests that some factors driving social media and citations are quite different: (1) while

editorials and news items are seldom cited, these types of document are most popular on Twitter; (2) longer papers typically
attract more citations, but the converse is true of social media platforms; (3) SSH papers are most common on social media
platforms, the opposite to citations. Haustein, S., Costas, R., and Larivière, V. (2015). Characterizing Social Media Metrics

39

when the altmetrics are aggregated to entire journals118 rather than to individual articles. Social usage
impact can be extracted from a range of social websites that allow users to upload, or register
information about, academic publications, such as Mendeley, Twitter, Academia and ResearchGate.
These sites can be used for assessing an aspect of the usage of publications based on numbers of
downloads, views or registered readers. Fuller information on the following are included within the
literature review (Supplementary Report I): Faculty of 1000 Web Recommendations; Mendeley and
other Online Reference Managers; Twitter and microblog citations.

3.2.5.

Book-based indicators

Research evaluation in book-oriented fields is more challenging than for article-based subject areas
because counts of citations from articles, which dominate traditional citation indexes, seem
insufficient to assess the impact of books. The Book Citation Index within Web of Science is a recent
response to this issue119 since journal citations on their own might miss about half of the citations to
books.120 However, some academic books are primarily written for teaching (e.g. textbooks) or
cultural purposes (e.g. novels and poetry) and citation counts of any kind may be wholly inappropriate
for these.
In REF2014, books (authored books, edited books, scholarly editions and book chapters) were more
frequently submitted to Main Panels C and D (29.4%) than to Main Panels A and B (0.4%), and many
of these books (art, music and literary works) may have merits that are not reflected by conventional
bibliometric methods (see Table 3 in the annex for the full distribution of results in REF2014).
Moreover, the main sources of citations to humanities books are other books.121 Even today, the
Thomson Reuters Book Citation Index and Scopus index a relatively small number of books
(50,000122 and 40,000123 as of September 2014, respectively) and this may cause problems for

of Scholarly Papers: The Effect of Document Properties and Collaboration Patterns. PLOS ONE. 10(3): e0120495.
DOI:10.1371/journal.pone.0120495.
118 Alhoori, H. and Furuta, R. (2014). Do altmetrics follow the crowd or does the crowd follow altmetrics? In: Proceedings

of the IEEE/ACM Joint Conference on Digital Libraries (JCDL 2014). Los Alamitos: IEEE Press.
http://people.tamu.edu/~alhoori/publications/alhoori2014jcdl.pdf; Haustein, S. and Siebenlist, T. (2011). Applying social
bookmarking data to evaluate journal usage. Journal of Informetrics. 5(3), 446-457.
119 Previously noted in Garfield, E. (1996). Citation indexes for retrieval and research evaluation. Consensus Conference on

the Theory and Practice of Research Assessment, Capri.
120 Hicks, D. (1999). The difficulty of achieving full coverage of international social science literature and the bibliometric

consequences. Scientometrics. 44 (2), 193-215.
121 Thompson, J. W. (2002). The death of the scholarly monograph in the humanities? Citation patterns in literary

scholarship. Libri. 52(3), 121-136; Kousha, K., and Thelwall, M. (2014). An automatic method for extracting citations from
Google Books. Journal of the Association for Information Science and Technology. DOI: 10.1002/asi.23170.
122 http://wokinfo.com/products_tools/multidisciplinary/webofscience
123 http://blog.scopus.com/posts/scopus-content-book-expansion-project-update

40

bibliometric analyses of books.124 Expert peer judgment of books seems to be by far the best method
but it is even more time-consuming and expensive than article peer assessment because books are
generally much longer.125 In response, alternative sources have been investigated for book impact
assessment, including syllabus mentions, library holding counts, book reviews and publisher prestige.
Many of the indicators discussed elsewhere in the full literature review (Supplementary Report I) can
also be used for books but have not yet been evaluated for this purpose. However, since academic
books are still mainly read in print form, download indicators are not yet so relevant.
Google Books126 contains a large number of academic and non-academic books based upon digitising
the collections of over 40 libraries around the world as well as partnerships with publishers.127 Several
studies have shown that the coverage of Google Books is quite comprehensive, but, due to copyright
considerations, Google Books does not always reveal the full text of the books that it has indexed.128
Although Google Books is not a citation index and provides no citation statistics of any kind, it is
possible to manually search it for academic publications and hence identify citations to these
publications from digitised books.129 Google Books could be useful because citations from books have
been largely invisible in traditional citation indexes and the current book citation search facilities in
Scopus and Web of Science cover relatively few books that are predominantly in English and from a
small number of publishers, which is problematic for citation impact assessment in book-based
disciplines.130

124 For example: Gorraiz, J., Purnell, P. J., and Glänzel, W. (2013). Opportunities for and limitations of the book citation

index. Journal of the American Society for Information Science and Technology, 64(7), 1388-1398; Torres-Salinas, D.,
Robinson-García, N., Jiménez-Contreras, E., and Delgado López-Cózar, E. (2012). Towards a ‘Book Publishers Citation
Reports’. First approach using the ‘Book Citation Index’. Revista Española de Documentación Científica. 35(4), 615-620;
Torres-Salinas, D., Rodríguez-Sánchez, R., Robinson-García, N., Fdez-Valdivia, J., and García, J. A. (2013). Mapping
citation patterns of book chapters in the Book Citation Index. Journal of Informetrics, 7(2), 412-424.
125 See Weller, A. C. (2001). Editorial peer review: Its strengths and weaknesses. Medford, N.J: Information Today.
126 http://books.google.com
127 http://books.google.com/intl/en/googlebooks/about/
128 Chen, X. (2012). Google Books and WorldCat: A comparison of their content. Online Information Review. 36 (4), 507-

516.; Weiss, A., and James, R. (2013). Assessing the coverage of Hawaiian and pacific books in the Google Books
digitization project. OCLC Systems and Services, 29(1), 13-21.; Weiss, A., and James, R. (2013a). An examination of
massive digital libraries’ coverage of Spanish language materials: Issues of multi-lingual accessibility in a decentralized,
mass-digitized world. Paper presented at the Proceedings – 2013 International Conference on Culture and Computing,
Culture and Computing 2013. 10-14.
129 Kousha, K., and Thelwall, M. (2009). Google Book Search: Citation analysis for social science and the humanities.

Journal of the American Society for Information Science and Technology. 60(8), 1537-1549; Kousha, K., Thelwall, M., and
Rezaie, S. (2011). Assessing the citation impact of books: The role of Google Books, Google Scholar, and Scopus. Journal
of the American Society for Information Science and Technology, 62(11), 2147-2164.
130 Gorraiz, J., Purnell, P., and Glänzel, W. (2013); Torres-Salinas et al. (2012), (2013).

41

National or international library holdings statistics can indicate library interest in books and seem to
reflect a different type of impact to that of citations, perhaps including educational and cultural
impacts. These statistics are relatively simple to collect automatically from the OCLC WorldCat
library holding catalogue,131 with more than 2.2 billion items from over 72,000 libraries in 170
countries. These data, which are based upon book holdings and hence would be costly to manipulate,
seem promising for assessing the wider influence of books in SSH based on the information needs of
users, teaching staff and researchers. While more detailed borrowing statistics might be even more
useful, these data do not seem to be currently available.
Publisher prestige, reputational surveys, libcitation and citation indicators can also help to identify
prestigious scholarly publishers. A combination of all of the above may be more useful for rating
(rather than ranking) academic publishers of books or monographs as long as other factors, such as
geographical, language and disciplinary differences, are taken into consideration when they are used.

3.2.6.

Varieties of outputs

While much of this discussion tends to focus on text-based outputs in peer-reviewed publications, it is
common for scholars across all disciplines to produce a wider variety of outputs from their research
processes. These range from research datasets, software, images, videos and patents, through to
exhibitions, compositions, performances, presentations and non-refereed publications (such as policy
documents or ‘grey’ literature). For some of these there may be plausible indicators of impact, such as
audience size, art gallery prestige, composition commissioner prestige, art sales or sales prices. In
most cases, however, it is likely that the contributions of individual works are so varied that any data
presented to support an impact case would not be directly comparable with other available data,
although they could be presented as evidence to support a specific argument about the contribution of
a work.

3.2.7.

How robust are alternative quality metrics?

There is empirical evidence that a wide range of indicators derived from the web for scholars or their
outputs are related to scholarly activities in some way because they correlate positively and
significantly with citation counts. In many cases these metrics can also be harvested on a large scale
in an automated way with a high degree of accuracy (see Appendix B of the literature review,
Supplementary Report I, for methods to obtain alternative metric data). Nevertheless, most are easy to
manipulate132 and nearly all are susceptible to spam to some extent. Thus, alternative metrics do not

131 www.worldcat.org; http://oclc.org/worldcat/catalog.en.html
132 For example: Dullaart, C. (2014). High Retention, Slow Delivery. (Art piece: 2.5 million Instagram followers bought and

distributed to artists. See e.g. http://jeudepaume.espacevirtuel.org/, http://dismagazine.com/dystopia/67039/constant-dullaart100000-followers-for-everyone/).

42

seem to be suitable as a management tool with any kind of objective to measure, evaluate or manage
research.133 Even if no manipulation took place, which seems unlikely, the results would be suspected
of being affected by manipulation and in the worst case scenario the results would be extensively
manipulated and researchers would waste their time and money on this manipulation.
In our call for evidence, 19 respondents (of which 15 were HEIs) proposed that altmetrics could be
used as a research assessment tool; while 12 responses (of which eight were HEIs), argued that
altmetrics are not reliable enough to be used as a measure of research quality. This reflects the
uncertainties often associated with these indicators which are at an early stage of development. For an
altmetric to be taken seriously, empirical evidence of its value is needed in addition to evidence of a
reasonable degree of robustness against accidental or malicious spam.

3.3.

Input indicators

In some contexts, there is support for the measurement of research quality through the use of proxy
indicators including: external research income (recognising that organisations are in competition for
these funds, so success is a marker of quality); research student enrolments; and research student
completion data. These were all mentioned by a number of respondents to our call for evidence as
potential measures of quality, but more often as a useful means to measure ‘environment’ or ‘vitality’
or the research base, along the lines of the REF’s environment component.134
In UK HEIs, the maturity of current research information systems (CRISs) varies markedly between
institutions. Some HEIs have fully fledged systems that are completely integrated with other core
systems, others have stand-alone systems, and some rely on non-specific systems such as generic
databases and spreadsheets. Some UK HEIs capture or wish to capture data associated with all of the
above items (and more) for internal or external purposes. Publication information is most commonly
collected in central systems. Grant information, commercialisation, and PhD numbers and
completions tend to be collected centrally and most can produce information by staff member/FTE.
On the other hand, prizes, editorships, other esteem indicators and international visitors might more
commonly only be collected locally within departments. Information on research infrastructure is
perhaps the most variable and, anecdotally at least, least likely to be comprehensive (though

133 Wouters, P., and Costas, R. (2012). Users, narcissism and control: Tracking the impact of scholarly publications in the

21st century. SURFfoundation. Retrieved November 29, 2014, from https://www.surf.nl/kennis-eninnovatie/kennisbank/2012/rapport-users-narcissism-and-control.html [In Dutch].
134 For instance, see the University of Durham’s response to our call for evidence, available at

www.hefce.ac.uk/media/hefce,2014/content/research/research,metrics/responses_to_metrics_review_call_for_evidence.pdf

43

initiatives like equipment.data.ac.uk and the work of sharing consortiums like N8 show that
infrastructure can be established and well-utilised).

3.4.

Indicators of impact

Attempting to measure and capture broader societal or external impacts of academic work is a
relatively new concern in the UK system. Originally emphasised by the UK Research Councils as a
means of enhancing the external reach of their grant awards, impact became an established part of the
UK’s research assessment culture when it was introduced into the REF in 2011.135 Impact is still a
contested term, with a variety of definitions and understandings of its implications. The ways in which
it can be assessed and measured are equally varied. Some definitions of impact highlight the
importance of being able to evidence its reach and significance: “Research has an external impact
when an auditable or recorded influence is achieved upon a non-academic organization or actor in a
sector outside the university sector itself ... external impacts need to be demonstrated rather than
assumed.” 136
One problem associated with the creation of impact indicators is that the model of impact seemingly
supported by some definitions can be rather linear, when dissemination is in fact more broadly
interspersed through the research cycle.137 For example findings from the recent HEFCE review of
monographs and open access show that arts and humanities scholars don’t first research and then
disseminate in a neat two-stage process.138 This means that developing metrics for the ways in which
impact is created in these disciplines is harder and the use of ad-hoc data that are contextualised by
interpretation of their meaning may be more suitable.139 Others also argue that academics who create
impact by building long-lasting partnerships with groups and organisations will not be able to
demonstrate the depth and detail of impacts through metrics or data alone. A key concern from some
critics is that impact metrics focus on what is measurable at the expense of what is important.
Evidence of external impacts can take a number of forms – references to, citations of or discussion of
an academic or their work; in a practitioner or commercial document; in media or specialist media

135 See www.ref.ac.uk/pubs/2011-01/. Arguably, the REF impact pilots (concluded 2010) marked the formal introduction of

the impact element.
136 LSE Public Policy Group. (2011).
137 A recent report on whether altmetrics are useful measures of broader impact is: Adams, J. and Loach, T. (2015). Altmetric

mentions and the communication of medical science: Disseminating research outcomes outside academia. Digital Science.
www.digital-science.com/blog/news/digital-research-report-altmetric-mentions-and-the-identification-of-research-impact.
Retrieved 1 June 2015.
138 Crossick, G. (2015). Monographs and Open Access: A report to HEFCE.

www.hefce.ac.uk/pubs/rereports/Year/2015/monographs/
139 Thelwall, M. and Delgado, M. (2015, in press). Arts and humanities research evaluation: No metrics please, just data.

Journal of Documentation. 71 (4).

44

outlets; in the records of meetings, conferences, seminars, working groups and other interchanges; in
the speeches or statements of authoritative actors; or via inclusions or referencing or weblinks to
research documents in an external organisation’s websites or intranets; in the funding, commissioning
or contracting of research or research-based consultancy from university teams or academics; and in
the direct involvement of academics in decision-making in government agencies, government or
professional advisory committees, business corporations or interest groups, and trade unions, charities
or other civil society organisations.140
Journal articles and books are seen to be less impact relevant than other forms of publications such as
research reports, briefing notes and conference papers. However research from Talbot and Talbot
found that journal articles were identified as the third most used route to find academic work by
policymakers.141 However, even where government documents, for example, quote academic work
these references are not citations in the traditional sense and are therefore not picked up by
bibliometric analysis. Grey literature produced by academics tends to be more used by policymakers
but its impact is difficult to capture. Firstly citations are not made in the usual way and secondly
academics have been slow to realise the importance of using tagging information such as DOIs in
order to allow these references to be tracked.142
The development of a range of alternative indicators has created the potential to diversify away from a
reliance upon counting citations to journal articles. Nevertheless, although a few alternative indicators
are promising and do have the potential to enable a new view of the impact and reach of research, the
‘science’ is in its infancy and most of the alternative metrics can be easily gamed. Some of the most
promising indicators are relevant to a much narrower range of research than are citations to journal
articles (F1000 ratings, patent citations, syllabus mentions, citations from Google Books). Hence, the
systematic use of alternative indicators as pure indicators of academic quality seems unlikely at the
current time, though they have the potential to provide an alternative perspective on research
dissemination, reach and ‘impact’ in its broadest sense.
The variety of evidence needed to build case studies of impact is such that, unlike scholarly impact, it
is difficult to reach a consensus about which indicators to use to highlight particular kinds of impact.
From the almost 7,000 impact case studies submitted to REF2014, there is little consistency in the

140 LSE Public Policy Group. (2011).
141 Talbot, C. and Talbot, C. (2014). Sir Humphrey and the professors: What does Whitehall want from academics?

Policy@Manchester.
www.policy.manchester.ac.uk/media/projects/policymanchester/1008_Policy@Manchester_Senior_Civil_Servants_Survey_
v4%281%29.pdf. Retrieved 1 June 2015.
142 See Ernesto Priego’s contribution to our Warwick workshop on this point

https://epriego.wordpress.com/2015/01/16/hefcemetrics-more-on-metrics-for-the-arts-and-humanities/

45

indicators that case study authors used to evidence the impact of their research. An analysis of the
impact case studies commissioned by HEFCE from Digital Science and King’s College London
concluded as follows:

“ The quantitative evidence supporting claims for impact was diverse and
inconsistent, suggesting that the development of robust impact metrics is unlikely.
There was a large amount of numerical data (ie, c.170,000 items, or c.70,000 with
dates removed) that was inconsistent in its use and expression and could not be
synthesized. In order for impact metrics to be developed, such information would
need to be expressed in a consistent way, using standard units. However, as noted
above, the strength of the impact case studies is that they allow authors to select the
appropriate data to evidence their impact. Given this, and based on our analysis of
the impact case studies, we would reiterate…impact indicators are not sufficiently
developed and tested to be used to make funding decisions.” 143

Although the potential for a small subset of quantitative data to represent a diverse array of impacts is
limited, we did receive a wealth of views on how the narrative elements of impact case studies could
be enhanced. For example, the work carried out by King’s College London examined the use of
Quality Adjusted Life Years (QALYs) as a measure of health impact in the case studies, and
concluded that in the future where this data was available it could allow better comparability between
impact cases.
There are likely to be numerous additional examples of indicators that could be used in this way, but
they are usually specific to certain types of impact and need to be interpreted in context. Sometimes
these indicators may be measures of dissemination (e.g. webpage visits or YouTube views) that need
to be considered alongside other evidence of impact. The reports from RAND Europe which analysed
impact in the REF, also provide useful evidence, noting that HEIs could develop their own impact
metrics and should be encouraged to do so in future, but any effort to define impact indicators up front
risks unnecessary limitations on the exercise, as has been found to be the case in other pilot impact
exercises.144 Furthermore, the same metrics may not be applicable across main panels and might not
work for all disciplines. For example, a subset of research users were concerned about measures when

143 King’s College London and Digital Science. (2015), p72.
144 See for example Ovseiko, P., Oancea, A. and Buchan, A. (2012). Assessing research impact in academic clinical

medicine: a study using Research Excellence Framework pilot impact indicators, BMC Health Services Research 2012,
12:478. www.biomedcentral.com/1472-6963/12/478. Retrieved 1 June 2015.

46

claiming an impact involving interaction with the public. As one panellist asked: “What is the right
number of website hits to become 4-star?” 145
Figure 1: Examples of types of impact metrics tracking how research has been used146

3.5.

Indicating ways ahead

There are widespread concerns that quantitative indicators, such as citation-based data, cannot provide
sufficiently nuanced or robust measures of quality when used in isolation. Bibliometricians generally
see citation rates as a proxy measure of academic impact or of impact on the relevant academic
communities. But this is only one of the dimensions of academic quality. Quality needs to be seen as a
multidimensional concept that cannot be captured by any one indicator, and which dimension of
quality should be prioritised may vary by field and mission.
During the process of our own review, we have found greater support for the use of (carefully chosen)
indicators as a complement to other forms of assessment (in particular peer review), than as a means
to assess research quality by themselves (this is discussed further in Chapter 5). Many recent studies

145 Manville, C., Guthrie, S., Henham, M., Garrod, B., Sousa, S., Kirtley, A., Castle-Clark, S. and Ling, T. (2015). p34.
146 This figure was designed by Jane Tinkler for the review.

47

also recommend opting for a combination of strategies, and it is crucial that these are tailored to the
specific context in question.
It is crucial to consider what is best suited to the scale and focus of assessment. Concern over the
application of indicators at inappropriate scales features prominently in recent statements, such as
DORA and the Leiden Manifesto. Too often, managers and evaluators continue to rely on metrics that
are recognised as unsuitable as measures of individual performance, such as journal-level indicators.
Using carefully chosen ‘baskets’ of (qualitative and quantitative) indicators is often deemed to
provide the best way forward. “A single indicator cannot fully capture and represent the diversity and
complexity of the relationships within a research funding ecosystem. Quantitative measures are a
conduit of information that represents only very specific aspects of that ecosystem.” 147 It is also
important to emphasise that high quality bibliometric data are expensive. But we want high quality
data, otherwise our analysis is not worth the effort.
Turning to indicators for impact, there is an increasing body of literature on how scholarly impact
relates to broader external impact. Work by Altmetrics for example has shown that citations and
altmetric indicators seem to be measuring different but possibly related aspects.148 And early analysis
from REF2014 highlights that the same units score well on outputs and impact, showing that these
aspects may be constituent of each other.
Views that the impact agenda is problematic are found across all disciplines but are perhaps strongest
in the arts and humanities where it is felt that it is impossible to be able to show the variety and depth
of impact of the work in those fields. However these disciplines have experience in developing
possible indicators for, or data about, the impacts of arts and humanities research, particularly in REF
impact terms.149 It could be that experience from cultural organisations could be used in order to
further develop impact metrics that are relevant for the outputs produced by arts and humanities
researchers.
As noted elsewhere, the way that impact is assessed in the REF is through case studies alongside a
broader narrative (see Section 9.3.2). These narrative-based outputs allow academics to outline in
detail how their work has created impact and therefore can be crafted to take appropriate account of

147 Council of Canadian Academies. (2012), p42
148 Also see Adams, J. and Loach, T. (2015). This compares altmetrics mentions and the communication of medical research.

The authors call for more work to be done to better understand definitive outcomes in terms of the relationship between the
content of biomedical research papers and the frequency with which they are mentioned in social media contexts.
149 Thelwall, M. and Delgado, M. (2015, in press). Arts and humanities research evaluation: No metrics please, just data.

Journal of Documentation. 71 (4).

48

the context. As with peer review, case studies allow expert judgement to be used in determining
successful research impact. The REF made use of external research users as part of assessing impact;
they were actively involved in providing context to impact claims made by academics. For some, case
studies are the only viable route to assessing impact; they offer the potential to present complex
information and warn against more focus on quantitative metrics for impact case studies. Others
however see case studies as “fairy tales of influence” 150 and argue for a more consistent toolkit of
impact metrics that can be more easily compared across and between cases.
In sum, while some alternative metrics seem to reflect types of impact that are different from that of
traditional citations, only Google patent citations and clinical guideline citations can yet be shown to
reflect wider societal impact. In addition, as the range of impact metrics is so wide – rightly so to be
able to show the range of impacts taking place – many of them would be too rare to help distinguish
between the impacts of typical publications. But they could be useful to give evidence of the impact
of the small minority of high impact articles. Overall, then, despite the considerable body of mostly
positive empirical evidence reviewed above, although alternative metrics do seem to give indications
of where research is having wider social impact they do not yet seem to be robust enough to be
routinely used for evaluations in which it is in the interest of stakeholders to manipulate the results.
Recent work on the REF impact case studies indicates that interdisciplinary research is more likely to
achieve greater impact, and it is to (inter)disciplinary differences and dilemmas that we now turn.151

150 Dunleavy, P. (2012). REF Advice Note 1: Understanding HEFCE’s definition of Impact, LSE Impact, 22 October.

http://blogs.lse.ac.uk/impactofsocialsciences/2012/10/22/dunleavy-ref-advice-1/
151 King’s College London and Digital Science (2015). p24.

49

4. Disciplinary dilemmas
“ Metrics have to be intertwined with the context of the discipline in question.”
Martin Eve, University of Warwick Arts and Humanities workshop
It is well known that practices of output production and research outlet selection vary significantly
across disciplinary and subdisciplinary fields. These diverse practices are bound up with specific
philosophical and methodological histories and practices, though the propensity to choose a particular
type of output or outlet over others may also be influenced by other factors, such as a specific
university or other policy environments.
This diversity has implications for how universally useful particular metrics are for some disciplines,
not least because of their limited coverage, as already discussed, but also because differences in
research practices across disciplines have deeper implications for the applicability of metrics.
The various emphases of existing metrics (at least as far as bibliometrics are concerned) has been on
counting and analysing research outputs published predominately in journals, and for that reason the
debate around metrics is often characterised by its identification of an ‘arts and humanities problem’,
where practices differ considerably from this pattern. It is perhaps inevitable that the focus of this
chapter is on how arts and humanities research might be distinctive, but we would sound a note of
caution here. Research is diverse, right across the academy. Disciplinary differences are often broadly
and unhelpfully characterised, but can in reality be quite subtle and entirely valid where they occur.
Metrics should not become the ‘tail that wags the dog’ of research practice in all disciplines. Rather, it
is incumbent on those who design and use metrics to take a fuller account of the existing diversity of
research, and design sensitive and meaningful metrics to reflect and support this.

4.1.

Variations in research outputs

Researchers produce a variety of research outputs across the range of disciplines. Submissions to
REF2014 revealed a wealth of types of output submitted across all units of assessment: journal
articles, books, datasets, performances, compositions, artefacts, software, patents, exhibitions,
installations, designs, digital media – the list goes on. RCUK’s use of Researchfish has compiled a
large structured dataset of outputs linked to research funded since 2006, and this demonstrates that a
diverse range of outputs are produced across the breadth of research disciplines, and that certain

50

outputs are not exclusive to particular disciplines.152 For instance, although rare, it is not unheard of
for life science researchers to write a play or devise a work inspired by their research, and
interdisciplinary research often results in unusual or multimodal outputs. It is therefore important not
to oversimplify. However, some general trends for output production, across broad disciplinary areas,
can be noted as follows:153



Journal articles are the primary output for many disciplines (on average half of all
output reports captured in Researchfish154) but their importance varies, tending to
play a less predominant role in the arts and humanities, and some areas of the social
sciences;



Monographs and book chapters are particularly important for many disciplines
within the humanities, and for some within the social sciences;155



Conference contributions are particularly important for computer scientists and
engineers;



Products and prototypes are important outputs for some academics, particularly in
the engineering sciences;



Art works, artefacts and practice-based outputs are more likely to play an important
role for arts-based disciplines.

While not entirely representative of output production across subject areas,156 some idea of the trends
in output production can be gained by looking at the spread of output types submitted to REF2014
across the 36 panels (see Table 3 in the annex).
As noted in Section 3.1 of the previous chapter, such trends are noteworthy as some outputs are less
likely to be included within bibliographic databases, which are central to the formulation of many
bibliometric indicators and analyses (see Section 3.1). In particular, book publications and

152 While the REF and RCUK have noted this diversity, this doesn’t necessarily reflect what researchers actually do – instead

it reflects what is considered important to submit to the various assessment or reporting systems.
153 Other outputs might include audio-visual recordings, technical drawings, website content, software, designs or working

models, exhibitions, patents, plant breeding rights, working papers, policy documents, research reports, legal cases, and
translations, amongst others. Furthermore, the diversity of outputs being produced by academics is becoming increasingly
broad due to digital and web-based technological developments.
154 www.mrc.ac.uk/documents/pdf/Introduction/; also note the above point in Footnote 144.
155 For a useful discussion of monographs, see Crossick, G. (2015).
156 Indeed see Adams, J. and Gurney, K. (2014). Evidence for excellence: Has the signal taken over the substance? An

analysis of journal articles submitted to the RAE2008. Digital Science. www.digital-science.com/resources/digital-researchreport-evidence-for-excellence-has-the-signal-overtaken-the-substance/. Retrieved 1 April 2015.

51

publications in “niche”157 or locally important journals play an important role in SSH but these
publications are often not indexed in bibliographic databases. Bibliometric analyses in computer
science and engineering involve similar difficulties, as many computer science and engineering
publications appear in conference proceedings, but such literature is often less well covered by
bibliographic databases, especially by Web of Science and Scopus, in comparison to journal articles,
perhaps because of the costs and complexity of monitoring conference proceedings.
Publication patterns and practices also vary across discipline. For instance in some areas, academics
might publish a number of articles per year, while in those disciplines where monographs are a
favoured output, producing one book every few years might be seen as appropriate. The language in
which outputs are likely to be produced can also vary; for some areas of SSH outputs are more likely
to be produced in the relevant national language, which may not be English. Outputs that are not
produced in English are less likely to be included in certain bibliographic databases, and may be less
likely to be captured in bibliometric indicators.
The number of authors per publications also varies to some extent by subject area. For instance,
outputs produced in the humanities are more likely to be single-authored, whereas publications in
some areas of science, such as medicine and biology, often have several. This will affect requirements
for allocation of credit, which can be relevant to bibliometric and citation indicators.

4.2.

Variations in citation practices

There is significant disciplinary diversity in terms of citation practices, and linked to this, the use and
acceptance of indicators for the assessment of research outputs. Such variations influence the
interpretation of indicators such as the JIF. For instance, top ranked journals in mathematics have a
JIF of three versus 30 for cell biology.
Some subject areas are more likely to rank their journals and publishers according to their JIFs, while
in other areas, such as SSH, this practice is less common158. Thus, bibliometrics measures such as JIFs
are more welcomed and embedded within certain disciplines than others.
Many humanities disciplines are characterised by internal debate, such that an output may be just as
likely to be cited for its stance on a particular issue, or place in a broader debate, than for the quality

157 Social sciences and humanities in particular have larger numbers of ‘national’ or ‘niche’ journals which are not indexed

in bibliometric databases. Yet these may still have transnational contributions and readership, and despite a smaller audience
may be highly significant for that specialist (sub)discipline.
158 With some exceptions, such as Business and Management, where the practice is more commonplace as per the ABS

ranking.

52

of the thinking or research it describes. In STEM disciplines, methods papers may also attract large
numbers of citations. Practices of citation are therefore more complex than is visible in the simplicity
of citation numbers.
The time span over which a piece of research is deemed to be relevant can also vary by discipline, as
some subject areas move faster than others. In general terms, research in SSH tends to remain relevant
for longer periods than in the natural sciences, as noted by recent analysis of journal usage half-lives
by the British Academy.159 This will affect citation practices and therefore the relevance of certain
indicators in particular contexts.
There are widespread concerns that indicators are less likely to capture the value of academic outputs
from less popular or more obscure fields of work as these are cited less often, or works published in
languages other than English and there are concerns that fields of enquiry, based on more theoretical
and also applied outputs may fall foul of certain indicator-based assessment strategies (whatever the
discipline).

4.3.

Differing disciplinary perspectives

There is an extensive literature on these and related issues, and the review has captured detailed
debate and commentary on these points, particularly in response to our call for evidence. Thirty-five
out of 153 respondents were concerned that indicators, in particular citation-based metrics, could
unfairly disadvantage some disciplines, especially in the arts, humanities and social sciences. Some
felt that in certain disciplines, including law, English literature, nursing and criminology, the use of
such indicators would never be plausible. A number of respondents made the point that variations are
often considerable within as well as between disciplines.
Throughout the course of the review, we have heard that assessment regimes must take different
cultures of output and citation into account to ensure that diverse research practices and cultures are
supported and captured appropriately.
This was certainly the case within discussions of the (potential) use of citation-based data within the
REF during our focus groups with REF panellists (see Chapter 9). At our roundtable review workshop
hosted by UCL in July 2014, a diversity of opinions on the potential use of (typically citation-based
data) were aired, with considerable variation in views across disciplines, as summarised below:

159 Darley, R, Reynolds, D. and Wickham, C. (2014). Open access journals in Humanities and Social Science: A British

Academy Research Project. www.britac.ac.uk/templates/asset-relay.cfm?frmAssetFileID=13584. Retrieved 1 June 2015.

53



Area studies: Capturing metrics data for both outputs and impacts has proved very
difficult in area studies;



Biological sciences: Citation metrics can be helpful as a last resort to inform
borderline decisions but are not currently seen as widely useful;



Built environment: Some disciplines are more inclined to use quantitative data but
they are in a minority. The use of metrics for assessment of architecture is flawed –
most outputs are buildings, design projects, books, etc, which don’t fit into metrics;



Computer science: There are significant problems relating to coverage of citations
by providers, for instance, indexing conference proceedings. Other computer science
outputs include software, which are poorly captured. Downloads might be one option
but it is unclear what these say about the excellence of research;



Education: It was suggested that some quantitative measures in research assessment
are appropriate, but there was a risk that reviewers might use metrics
disproportionately within the peer review process;



Performing arts: There is no formalised process of outputs, so a metrics-based
approach based on this assumption would be unsuitable. More discursive elements of
assessment would be welcome in these disciplines;



Physics and epidemiology: Very large author groups can be an issue. Currently
‘team science’ and collaborative research is not well rewarded. It would be worth
exploring whether metrics could address this. Current metrics and methods of
assessment can create tensions in research practices for some disciplines;



Psychosocial studies: There is an important question about why papers are cited and
how to interpret the meaning of high citation counts – for example, something
written provocatively can be cited many times despite being a paper well known to
be poor. There are also issues about use of metrics in people’s individual references,
when these are not necessarily comparable and produce certain kinds of gaming and
individualistic culture.

During the course of the review, we have found that the most serious concerns about certain
bibliometric and citation-based indicators tended to be voiced by academics working in arts and
humanities disciplines. Colleagues from the arts and humanities are not alone in their distrust of
certain research assessment indicators, however the diversity of their research practice and their
attendant methodologies and research cultures – which impact on views and attitudes surrounding
what epitomises quality and thus how to best evaluate research – perhaps makes them well placed to

54

articulate these concerns. Notwithstanding this, as pointed out in the literature review (Supplementary
Report I), research conducted within the arts, humanities (and parts of the social sciences) often
differs from much of the research conducted in the sciences in a number of fundamental ways, for
instance:160



It has a stronger national and regional orientation; for instance, more publications are
likely to be written in languages other than English;



It is often published in books and other outputs which are harder to measure
quantitatively (e.g. objects, films and ephemeral works);



It can have a different configuration of theoretical development that operates at a
different pace; it is difficult to introduce quantitative metrics of incremental work
that is undertaken over a long period of time and is slow to develop;



It depends on the scholars working alone as well as in collaborative teams, so is
sometimes less collaborative;



It may be directed more at a non-scholarly public.

Therefore, we contend that the specificities of different disciplines and sub-disciplines including, but
not limited to, the arts and humanities,161 need to be accounted for within research assessment. We
agree with the assertion by PLOS in their response to our call for evidence: “It is entirely appropriate
that various research communities seek to articulate the value of their work in different ways.”

4.4.

Tailored approaches

As noted above, metrics or indicators are not discipline-specific, as such, but can be more or less
relevant (or the data more complete) for particular forms of communication, interaction or re-use.
In research assessment contexts, comparison between publications from research fields is often a
requirement, but this is a challenging task due to differing cultures of output production and citation
practice. For outputs, attempts to address these difficulties, through processes or normalisation, are
often seen as crucial (see the literature review (Supplementary Report I) and Section 3.1.4 of this
report). Indeed, the call to normalise indicators across fields is one of the ten guiding principles for

160 Concerns raised in the literature review (Supplementary Report I) echo several of the concerns and points raised by

respondents to our call for evidence as well as contributors to our REF panel focus groups (from Main Panels C and D) who
were largely sceptical about the use of citation indicators as a means to assess research quality.
161 Also see the report produced by the BA and AHRC in (2006). Use of research metrics in the arts and humanities: report

of the expert group set up jointly by the Arts and Humanities Research Council and HEFCE.

55

research evaluation listed in the Leiden manifesto for research metrics.162 However, processes of
normalisation are not always straightforward and do not necessarily remove problems across all
fields, including but not limited to those related to the coverage of metrics. Relatedly, many of the
standard indicators currently on offer cannot adequately capture outputs from the arts, especially
practice-based subjects, but also written products such as poetry and novels.
Attempts are being made to find alternative and altmetric solutions as a means to provide other routes
forward, as discussed at our Sussex and Warwick workshops.163 However, while increasingly
sophisticated, these are not yet ready for widespread application in evaluations. Furthermore,
difficulties in terms of their potential application across and between different disciplines would
remain. For some disciplines, there is more (or less) of a culture of citing outputs online in ways that
will be captured. For instance, at the arts and humanities workshop in Warwick, some concerns were
raised that unless larger proportions of the arts and humanities community increase their use and
understanding of social media, for instance to capture and circulate DOIs, then such altmetric projects
are unlikely to succeed. As Ernesto Priego suggests, systems will not function unless communities
buy into them and use associated platforms in effective ways.164
There are also residual concerns in relation to books, though improvements are being made (see
Section 3.2.5). Perhaps further investment is required in these fields into the development of more
suitable indicators. However, the challenge of making meaningful comparisons across subjects is
likely to still remain and sufficient sensitivity to context would still be paramount.
One option would be to develop a ‘basket’ of appropriate metrics perhaps used alongside other forms
of assessment such as peer review, and tailored to the community in question. For instance, at
Warwick, we also heard that (perhaps) alternative measures/indicators need to be found given the
different nature of research quality within the arts and humanities, in order to avoid the risk of using
“inappropriate proxies, and bringing in unsuitable goals and objectives” (Jonathan Adams).
Most of the international case studies discussed in Section 2.6 tailor their approaches to research
assessment to account for some disciplinary variations, as is also the case with the REF, in terms of

162 Hicks, D., Wouters, P., Waltman, L., de Rijcke, S., and Rafols, I. (2015). Bibliometrics: The Leiden Manifesto for

research metrics. Nature. 520, 429-431. www.nature.com/news/bibliometrics-the-leiden-manifesto-for-research-metrics1.17351. Retrieved 1 May 2015.
163 Slides available at:

www.hefce.ac.uk/media/hefce/content/news/Events/2014/Metrics,we,trust/Mike%20Thelwall%20Slides%20In%20Metrics%20we%20Trust.pdf. Retrieved 1 February 2015;
www.hefce.ac.uk/media/hefce/content/news/Events/2015/HEFCE,metrics,workshop,Warwick/Thelwall.pdf. Retrieved 1
May 2015.
164 https://epriego.wordpress.com/2015/01/16/hefcemetrics-more-on-metrics-for-the-arts-and-humanities/. Retrieved 1 June

2015.

56

citation data provision. However, the degree to which such systems have been adapted varies
enormously, and primarily focuses on attempts to mitigate certain biases of bibliometric analyses.
Snowball Metrics also attempts to provide clarity to the definition and use of metrics, such that
disciplinary differences could be more readily accounted for.
However, use of tailored and varied approaches raises additional complexities in terms of cost and
administration, has implications for interdisciplinary research (as discussed further in the next
section), and could lead to potential disquiet between groups. Claire Donovan, who spoke at our
Warwick arts and humanities workshop, discussed the use of different research assessment methods
within the Australian system, where some subject areas just employed metrics and others used a mix;
she warned that this was not without its attendant problems, and has the potential to lead to perceived
hierarchies which may cause significant tension between disciplinary groups.165

4.5.

Indicators of interdisciplinarity

In recent years, there has been an increasing emphasis on the importance of interdisciplinary research,
but also a recognition that this isn’t always easy to undertake effectively, or to support. Our literature
review (Supplementary Report I, Section 1.3.2.2) highlights past attempts to establish whether certain
modes of research assessment, including the 1996 RAE , have helped or hindered interdisciplinary
working.
Throughout the review, a number of contributors have emphasised the need to pay due attention to
supporting interdisciplinary working. For instance, a small number of responses to the call for
evidence (eight in total) expressed concern that the use of discipline-led metrics could unfairly
disadvantage interdisciplinary research. At the Sussex review workshop, several contributors
suggested ways to encourage interdisciplinarity, including:



Taking plurality seriously, calling for metrics to open up the debate rather than
closing down the range of outputs within disciplines. It is argued that we need to
resist strong demands to keep systems simple, given that the research system may be
irreducibly complex. ‘Baskets’ of metrics that include qualitative and quantitative
indicators are more likely to give a better picture of how systems work.



Adopt new indicators that ask meaningful questions about the research enterprise
that appreciate the multiplicity of qualities underpinning research. These would give

165 Slides available at

www.hefce.ac.uk/media/hefce/content/news/Events/2015/HEFCE,metrics,workshop,Warwick/Donovan.pdf. Retrieved 1
June 2015.

57

due consideration to the type of research being carried out, who is using and doing
the research and the networks involved.



Evaluation processes could better be linked to the creative process. There is a need to
create further novel research experiences, which could include work across and
between disciplines.



Some of the work that Academic Analytics have been undertaking to find indicators
for discovery, for instance highlighting the interdisciplinary work of US academics
through network analysis, may be useful in this context.

4.6.

Resolving our differences

It is clear that research across disciplines, and within them, is diverse in practice and output. Variation
in citation practices is the most obvious and striking example of this diversity, but the differences run
deeper, drawing in questions of method, debate, epistemology, value, quality and documentation. The
research system clearly displays a degree of complexity that is difficult to reduce to simple numbers,
but approaches that take account of local practice within disciplines and sub-disciplines may prevent
unhelpful or misleading comparisons being made between different types and modes of research and
encourage – and perhaps even nurture – diversity. These approaches would carry significant costs,
though, and may hamper interdisciplinary research and creative approaches more broadly. There are
no quick fixes here, but the greatest potential for recognising differences may come in the form of
‘baskets’ of indicators – qualitative and quantitative – that can capture the valuable aspects of research
practice, output and impact within all disciplines, however they are configured.

58

5. Judgement and peer review
“ Reputation is an idle and most false imposition, oft got without merit and lost
without deserving.”
William Shakespeare, Othello, Act 2, Scene 3
There are three broad approaches to the assessment of research: a metrics-based model; peer review;
and a mixed model, combining these two approaches. Choosing between these remains contentious.166
In this chapter we explore the relationships, trade-offs and interdependencies between metrics, expert
judgement and peer review. As Derek Sayer reminded us in his response to the review, it is important
to avoid comparing “a crude caricature of metrics with an idealized chimera of peer review”.167

5.1.

Strengths and weaknesses of peer review

Peer review is a general umbrella term for a host of expert-based review practices including the
review of journal manuscripts, peer review of applications for funding and career promotions, and
national peer review-based research assessments such as the REF. It takes place at each stage of the
research cycle: in the review of research proposals; the review of outputs (pre- and post-publication);
and in broader retrospective assessments of outputs (such as the REF).
Peer review is arguably the most important method of quality control in all disciplines and can be
characterised as a core family of mechanisms by which academic communities control themselves and
maintain their social order, academic ethos and norms. As noted in a 2015 report commissioned by
the Wellcome Trust, “peer review remains a bedrock of the scholarly communications system.” 168
The general respect for peer review was evident in the responses to our call for evidence. Although
not explicitly sought in the call for evidence, a common theme that emerged was that peer review
should be retained as the primary mechanism for evaluating research quality. Responses that were
generally or supportive of the use of metrics both argued that metrics must not be seen as a substitute
for peer review (26 responses, 13 of which were from learned societies), which should continue to be
the ‘gold standard’ for research assessment. Sceptical responses generally argued that metrics could

166 Technopolis. (2014). Measuring scientific performance for improved policy making, p8.
167 Sayer, D. (2014) Time to abandon the gold standard?, LSE Impact.

http://blogs.lse.ac.uk/impactofsocialsciences/2014/11/19/peer-review-metrics-ref-rank-hypocrisies-sayer/. Retrieved 21 June
2015.
168 Research Information Network. (2015) Scholarly communication and peer review: The current landscape and future

trends. A report commissioned by the Wellcome Trust.
www.wellcome.ac.uk/stellent/groups/corporatesite/@policy_communications/documents/web_document/wtp059003.pdf,
p27. Retrieved 1 May 2015.

59

never become a realistic substitute for peer review, while many supportive responses stated that robust
metrics could support peer reviewers in making nuanced judgements about research excellence. Many
responses argued that changes should only be made to the established methods for research
assessment where they could be demonstrated to provide improvement. However, it was recognised
that peer review is not without its own flaws or disadvantages, and suggestions for its improvement
included increasing the transparency and representativeness of the process.
Ethnographic studies of peer review processes have emerged only recently. They often focus on peer
review in the context of funding decisions169 and are often linked to policy-driven agendas and needs.
There are often complaints about the lack of robust evidence to support the notion that peer review is
the best method the research community has as its disposal.170 In general, however, peer review is still
considered the main quality control mechanism, arguably due to a lack of viable alternatives.171
The literature review (Supplementary Report I) discusses evaluations of peer review in much more
detail, but the following summarises its key strengths and weaknesses as a mode of assessment.172
Weaknesses of Peer Review

Strengths of Peer Review

 It is slow, inefficient and expensive,

 Its foundation in specialised

although most costs are hidden;

knowledge of the subject,
methodology and literature

 Human judgment is subjective – which may

relevant for specific decisions;

however also be seen as a strength;173

 Its social nature;

 It is almost by definition not transparent;

 The subjectivity of this

 It is inconsistent, sometimes characterised

approach could be seen as a

as a lack of inter-rater reliability;

strength (as well as a
weakness);

169 Lamont, M. (2009). How Professors Think: Inside the Curious World of Academic Judgment. Cambridge, MA: Harvard

University Press.
170 See Smith, R. (2015). The peer review drugs don’t work. Times Higher, 28 May 2015.

https://www.timeshighereducation.co.uk/content/the-peer-review-drugs-dont-work. Retrieved 1 June 2015.
171 Kassirer, J. P. (1994). Peer Review. JAMA. 272 (2), 96. DOI:10.1001/jama.1994.03520020022005; Smith, R. (2006).

Peer review: a flawed process at the heart of science and journals. Journal of the Royal Society of Medicine. 99 (4), 178–182.
www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC1420798/. Retrieved 1 March 2015.
172 The table also includes insights from: Council of Canadian Academies. (2012).
173 Lee, C. J., Sugimoto, C. R., Zhang, G., and Cronin, B. (2013). Bias in peer review. Journal of the American Society for

Information Science and Technology. 64 (1), 2–17. DOI:10.1002/asi.22784.

60

 It is a biased process (e.g. gender bias

 It can help assess elements of

regarding career decisions, bias against

research which are challenging

negative studies in publication decisions,

to quantify e.g. novelty;

bias in favour of prestigious institutes, bias

 It can deliver more nuanced

in favour of dominant paradigms);

and detailed understandings of

 Its bias is strengthened by the Matthew

research in the context of

174

effect;

research production.

 The process can be abused (e.g. to block
competitors, to plagiarise);

 It is not very good at identifying errors in
data or even in detecting fraudulent
research;175

 It cannot process the complete research
output of a nation and will therefore result
in distorted rankings (since rankings are
sensitive to the selection of submissions to
the assessments);

 It cannot provide information about the
productivity and efficiency of the research
system;

 The selection of peer reviewers may create
problems because of a variety of reasons
(bias, lack of experts in emerging and
interdisciplinary areas, lack of experts due
to the speed of research areas, etc).

However, the identification of peer review’s weaknesses has stimulated a series of experiments with
different forms of peer review, especially in the area of journal publishing and grant reviews, and also,

174 Merton, R. K. (1968). The Matthew Effect in Science. Science. 159, 56–62; Merton, R. K. (1988). The Matthew Effect in

Science, II: Cumulative Advantage and the Symbolism of Intellectual Property. ISIS. 79, 606–623.
175 Martin, B. (1992). Scientific Fraud and the Power Structure of Science. Prometheus. 10 (1), 83–98.

DOI:10.1080/08109029208629515.

61

if less often, in the context of national research assessment exercises. Attempts to improve or enhance
peer review include:176



Single-blind or double-blind peer review to remedy the bias in favour of prestigious
institutions;



Post-publication review instead of pre-publication review;



Open peer review to increase transparency and accountability and counter the risk of
abuse;



Training of reviewers to improve the quality of the reviews;



Increasing interest in the provision of rewards in the form of scholarly credit and
recognition for reviewers;



Developing new standards of peer review (e.g. a focus on methodology rather than
substantive quality criteria as developed by PLOS ONE in journals or other reader
systems in grant review);



Provision of article-level metrics, relating to comments and ratings, mentions in
social media and bookmarking.

5.2.

Can indicators and metrics replace peer review?

A common refrain during the process of collecting evidence for this review has been the warning to
avoid tensioning an idealised problem-free notion of peer review against an overly simplistic and
negative construction of metrics. The picture is clearly far more complex than this, and once again it
is crucial to emphasise the role that context must play when making decisions about research
assessment processes and strategy.
However, the recognition that some aspects of peer review are problematic has led to calls to replace
or supplement peer review with citation indicators and other metrics that may measure aspects of
scholarly quality and impact. Similarly, there have been recent calls to rethink the REF in the light of

176 Jayasinghe, U. W., Marsh, H. W., and Bond, N. (2006). A new reader trial approach to peer review in funding research

grants : An Australian experiment. Scientometrics. 69 (3), 591–606; Marsh, H. W., Jayasinghe, U. W., and Bond, N. W.
(2008). Improving the peer-review process for grant applications: reliability, validity, bias, and generalizability. The
American Psychologist. 63 (3), 160–8. DOI:10.1037/0003-066X.63.3.160; Pontille, D., and Torny, D. (2014). The Blind
Shall See! The Question of Anonymity in Journal Peer Review. Ada: A Journal of Gender, New Media, and Technology.
(“4”), 1–15. DOI:10.7264/N3542KVW; Smith, R. (2006). Peer review: a flawed process at the heart of science and journals.
Journal of the Royal Society of Medicine. 99 (4), 178–182. Retrieved from
www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC1420798/; Research Information Network. (2015).

62

concerns about the specific form of peer review as operated in this context.177 Some critics have
suggested the use of metrics as an alternative for peer review, e.g. a respondent to our call for
evidence stated:

“ ...greater use of quantitative evidence (metrics) could be seen as a fairer and more
objective method of assessment [because] metrics are arguably more transparent
than peer review as the basis for the score/grading can be verified independently.”
University of Southampton, HEI response
The literature review (Supplementary Report I) explores numerous attempts to undertake correlations
between indicators (using various types and combinations of bibliometric measure) and outputs of
peer review, and notes that the rise of national assessment exercises based on peer review in the UK,
Italy, the Scandinavian countries, the Netherlands, Belgium and other countries, has created a novel
opportunity to study the extent to which the outcome of peer review evaluations can be predicted by
or correlated to assessments only based on bibliometric data.
A summary of recent studies focusing on the UK context can be found within the literature review
(Supplementary Report I), but two HEFCE exercises are also relevant here as well. HEFCE’s 2008
pilot project to explore the potential for bibliometrics178 found they were insufficiently robust at that
point in time to be used formulaically or to replace expert review in the REF. In areas where
publication in journals was the main type of output being submitted to the exercise, bibliometrics
were more representative of the research undertaken. Citation information could be used to inform
expert review, but robustness varies across the fields of research covered by the pilot, with lower
levels of coverage decreasing the representativeness of the citation information. Much more recently,
for this review, we have completed a detailed exercise correlating REF outputs with indicators (as
detailed in Chapter 9, and Supplementary Report II).

5.3.

A delicate balance

In summary, the literature shows varying strengths of correlation between bibliometric indicators and
peer review assessment. Correlation strengths vary between fields both within the natural sciences, the
social sciences, and the humanities, and may even vary within fields. In some fields citation-based
indicators are strong predictors of peer review outcomes, in other fields this may be research income,

177 Sayer, D. (2014). Time to abandon the gold standard? Peer review for the REF falls far short of internationally accepted

standards. http://blogs.lse.ac.uk/impactofsocialsciences/2014/11/19/peer-review-metrics-ref-rank-hypocrisies-sayer/.
Retrieved 1 March 2015. Also see Section 9.1 of this report.
178 Details of the pilot exercise are available at www.ref.ac.uk/about/background/bibliometrics/

63

and in a number of fields there is no correlation. In general, the correlation between bibliometrics and
peer review is weaker in most fields in the humanities, the applied fields, the technical sciences, and
the social sciences. This is partly caused by lower coverage in the citation databases, but also by
varying citation and publication cultures, as noted in Chapter 4.
Peer review and bibliometric data are not completely independent. Citation data are ultimately based
on researchers who cite or do not cite particular publications. The same communities are the source of
the peer review data. Although the meaning of the citation cannot be deduced from the role of the
literature reference, it does explain any positive correlation there may be between peer review and
bibliometrics. In addition, peer review decisions may have been influenced by prior knowledge of
bibliometric data. This interaction may have increased due to the large-scale availability of
bibliometric data and indicators.

5.4.

Informed peer review

Although no complete consensus exists in the bibliometric literature about what citation indicators
and bibliometric measures exactly mean, the vast majority of bibliometric experts see citations as a
proxy measure for the impact of the work on the relevant academic communities179. The act of
counting citations abstracts from the substantive information in the scholarly literature based on the
formal relationships among references and citations. By definition, many forms of peer review cannot
be replaced by bibliometric indicators. This is clearly the case where the research has not yet been
published, but in many other instances where substantive judgment is required.
This has given rise to the concept of informed peer review: the idea that the judicious application of
specific bibliometric data and indicators may inform the process of peer review, depending on the
exact goal and context of the assessment. Informed peer review is in principle relevant for all types of
peer review and at all levels of aggregation. Partly for this reason, the extent to which large-scale
research assessment exercises should be based on peer review (whether informed by metrics or not),
rather than metrics alone, remains a contested issue in the literature.
Some respondents to the call for evidence also suggested that the use of informed review within
national assessments, such as the REF, was already or would be worthwhile. As detailed in Chapter 9,
a form of informed review was introduced within the process of REF2014 for 11 of the 36 sub-panels

179 Martin, B. R., and Irvine, J. (1983). Assessing basic research: Some partial indicators of scientific progress in radio

astronomy. Research Policy. 12 (2), 61–90; for an overview of citation theory see Nicolaisen, J. (2007). Citation Analysis. In
Annual Review of Information Science and Technology, 41, 609–642. New York etc.: Interscience Publishers. Also see
Chapter 3 of this report.

64

(see Table 6 in the annex). This was generally seen as positive by those who used it, but viewed more
critically by sub-panels who had not drawn in any way on citation data.
Within the literature on this topic, there are several studies exploring informed peer review. One
analysis of the UK RAE180 concluded that the future of research evaluation would need to be based on
an intelligent combination of advanced metrics and informed peer review181. The paper argued that
metrics, especially sophisticated forms of citation analysis, may provide tools to keep the peer review
process more honest and transparent.
A further empirical argument in favour of informed peer review has been developed by Claire
Donovan.182 Her study argues that quantitative indicators are as infused with human values as
qualitative approaches. Quality and impact metrics have followed a trajectory “away from the
unreflexive use of standardised quantitative metrics divorced from expert peer interpretation, towards
triangulation of quantitative data, contextual analysis and placing a renewed and greater value on peer
judgement combined with stakeholder perspectives”.
Another specific argument in favour of informed peer review is the limitation of citation analysis to
predict future work. Mazloumian tested the assumption that citation counts are reliable predictors of
future success, analysing complete citation data on the careers of ~150,000 scientists.183 The results
show that among all citation indicators, annual citations at the time of prediction are the best predictor
of future citations. However, future citations of future work are hardly predictable, and others argue
that the impact of papers published in the past does not necessarily correlate with that of papers
published in the future.184
Informed peer review may also be used to provide feedback on the design of new performance
indicators185 and to develop improvements in systems of large-scale peer review. A recent study of ten

180 The UK Research Assessment Exercise was the predecessor to the REF.
181 Moed, H. (2007). The future of research evaluation rests with an intelligent combination of advanced metrics and

transparent peer review. Science and Public Policy. 34 (8), 575–583. DOI:10.3152/030234207X255179.
182 Donovan, C. (2007). The qualitative future of research evaluation. Science and Public Policy. 34 (8), 585–597.

DOI:10.3152/030234207X256538.
183 Mazloumian, A. (2012). Predicting scholars’ scientific impact. PLOS One. 7(11), e49246.

DOI:10.1371/journal.pone.0049246.
184 Penner, O., Petersen, A. M., Pan, R., and Fortunato, S. (2013). Commentary: The case for caution in predicting scientists’

future impact. Physics Today. 66 (4), 8. DOI:10.1063/PT.3.1928.
185 Hug, S. E., Ochsner, M., and Daniel, H.-D. (2013). Criteria for assessing research quality in the humanities: a Delphi

study among scholars of English literature, German literature and art history. Research Evaluation. 22 (5), 369–383.
DOI:10.1093/reseval/rvt008; Ochsner, M., Hug, S. E., and Daniel, H. (2012). Indicators for Research Quality for Evaluation
of Humanities Research : Opportunities and Limitations Quality criteria for research in the humanities Collecting indicators
for research in the humanities The measurement of research quality in the humanities. Bibliometrie – Praxis und Forschung,
1 (4), 1–17; Ochsner, M., Hug, S. E., and Daniel, H.-D. (2014). Setting the stage for the assessment of research quality in the

65

different conferences in computer science (ca. 9,000 reviews on ca. 2,800 submitted contributions)
explored possible improvements to conference peer review.186
Informed peer review can also be used to increase participation in review processes by non-academic
stakeholders, particularly in policy or practice-oriented fields of research. One recent study across
three countries (UK, Australia and Spain) argues that informed peer review can help us to move
beyond a situation where evaluation is confined to a “hyper-specialised committee of ‘experts’,
operating behind closed doors.” 187

5.5.

Complements and supplements

Much of the literature appears to support the idea of supplementing peer review by bibliometrics
(informed peer review), but this concept is yet to be fully operationalised. Bibliometric data may
counter specific weaknesses of peer review (for instance, its selectivity, and certain forms of bias), but
further work would need to be undertaken to decide on the best way forward in specific contexts.
This topic is part of an emerging literature in which the ‘relevance gap’188 or the ‘evaluation gap’189 is
seen as a major shortcoming of the traditional disciplinary peer review systems and practices.
Although this literature is mainly in the area of science policy and higher education studies and not
itself mainly concerned with bibliometrics, it may provide an important theoretical context for further
developing concepts of informed peer review and informed expert review.190 The decades of
experience among bibliometricians with bibliometric databases, indicators, and deliberations with
users of these data and indicators (sometimes under the flag of ‘validation of bibliometrics’) may
prove to be useful in a wider sense than has previously been realised.

humanities. Consolidating the results of four empirical studies. Zeitschrift Für Erziehungswissenschaft, 17 (S6), 111–132.
DOI:10.1007/s11618-014-0576-4.
186 Ragone, A., Mirylenka, K., Casati, F., and Marchese, M. (2013). On peer review in computer science: analysis of its

effectiveness and suggestions for improvement. Scientometrics. 97 (2), 317–356. DOI:10.1007/s11192-013-1002-z.
187 Derrick, G. E., and Pavone, V. (2013). Democratising research evaluation: Achieving greater public engagement with

bibliometrics-informed peer review. Science and Public Policy. 40 (5), 563–575. DOI:10.1093/scipol/sct007.
188 Nightingale, P., and Scott, A. (2007). Peer review and the relevance gap: ten suggestions for policy-makers. Science and

Public Policy. 34 (8), 543–553. DOI:10.3152/030234207X254396.
189 Wouters, P., Bar-Ilan, J., Thelwall, M., Aguillo, I. F., Must, Ü., Havemann, F. and Schneider, J. (2010). Academic

Careers Understood through Measurement and Norms (ACUMEN) (pp. 1–39).
190 Etzkowitz, H., and Leydesdorff, L. (2000). The dynamics of innovation: from national systems and “Mode 2” to a triple

helix of university-industry-government relations. Research Policy. 29, 109–123; Hemlin, S., and Rasmussen, S. B. (2006).
The Shift in Academic Quality Control. Science, Technology & Human Values, 31 (2), 173 –198.
DOI:10.1177/0162243905283639; Martin, B. R. (2011). What can bibliometrics tell us about changes in the mode of
knowledge production? Prometheus, 29(4), 455–479; Nowotny, H., Scott, P., and Gibbons, M. (2001). Re-thinking Science:
Knowledge and the Public in an Age of Uncertainty. Cambridge (UK): Polity Press.

66

This development has recently become more pronounced by the increased need for guidance in the
use of bibliometric and other performance indicators. A recent analysis of the bibliometric literature
has shown an increased role of authors not affiliated within the bibliometric discipline.191 In response
to the growing availability of bibliometrics and to concerns about the potential for abuse and
unintended effects, the bibliometric community started a number of initiatives to initiate principles of
good evaluation practices, building on initiatives in the community that started decades ago.192
Perhaps a new body of ‘translational bibliometrics’ literature to flesh out the concept of informed peer
review will emerge from these initiatives.
As altmetrics are still emergent, understandings of their potential use (and abuse) remains nascent.
Some suggestions to prevent gaming have been provided by Mike Thelwall193 amongst others,194 but
more work would needs to be done as this area develops. The emergence of DORA in 2013 is
encouraging and demonstrates that more people are likely to be thinking about these issues.195
Through its Alterative Assessment Metrics Initiative, NISO is also doing valuable work to identify
and advance standards for altmetrics, and to develop assessment criteria for non-traditional research
outputs, such as data sets, visualizations and software.196

191 Jonkers, K., and Derrick, G. E. G. E. (2012). The bibliometric bandwagon: Characteristics of bibliometric articles outside

the field literature. Journal of the American Society for Information Science and Technology. 63 (4), 829–836.
DOI:10.1002/asi.22620.
192 Moed, H. F., and Glänzel, W. (2004). Handbook of quantitative science and technology research : the use of publication

and patent statistics in studies of S&T systems. Dordrecht etc. Kluwer Academic Publishers; Noijons, E., and Wouters, P.
(2014). Report on the 19th International Conference on Science and Technology Indicators. ISSI Newsletter. 10 (4), 69–70;
Wouters, P., Glänzel, W., Gläser, J., and Rafols, I. (2013). The dilemmas of performance indicators of individual
researchers: an urgent debate in bibliometrics. ISSI Newsletter, 9 (3), 48–53.
193 Thelwall, M. (2014). Five recommendations for using alternative metrics in the future UK Research Excellence

Framework. http://blogs.lse.ac.uk/impactofsocialsciences/2014/10/23/alternative-metrics-future-uk-research-excellenceframework-thelwall/. Retrieved 1 June 2015.
194 NISO’s initiative emphasises the importance of understanding factors that may lead to the greater likelihood of gaming

and also the need for further research into improving data quality.
195 The San Francisco Declaration on Research Assessment can be found at: http://am.ascb.org/dora/
196 www.niso.org/topics/tl/altmetrics_initiative/

67

6. Management by metrics
“ Truly, evaluators can help do good things. They can increase the sensitivity of
practitioners and decision makers to the effects and side effects in society of what
they do…They can connect what is otherwise disconnected in hypocritical
organizations (such as goals and activities, promises, and deeds).”
Peter Dahler-Larsen197
Over the past twenty years, pressures on universities to be more accountable to government and
public funders of research have intensified. Partly in reaction to this, universities (and research
institutes) have in turn developed more formal methods of research assessment at the institutional
level, characterised by a more formalised focus on outcomes at a strategic level and the closer
management of research at an operational level.
This greater focus on the management of outcomes has facilitated the import of more corporate styles
of management. Since 2000, university leadership, governance and management have become
increasingly professionalised. In the UK, university finances and resources are more strategically and
professionally managed,198 and vice-chancellors are increasingly seen as chief executive officers.199
Within this cultural shift, metrics are often positioned as tools that can drive organisational financial
performance as part of an institution’s competitiveness. Coupled with greater competition for scarce
resources more broadly, this is steering academic institutions and their researchers towards being
more market-oriented.
These tendencies are strengthened by the fact that UK higher education is a significant export industry
– whose strengths are neatly captured in impressive performance metrics that justify continued
investment and stimulate student demand. All actors within the sector respond to this by gathering
metrics and using them to inform decisions: vice-chancellors and research managers are analysing
indicators to report to government and to inform institutional strategy; researchers contribute to an
emergent performance culture that is dependent on JIFs and h-indices; students are turning more and
more to information from public and private sources (league tables, the National Student Survey and
the new Key Information Set being prominent examples) to guide their choices of degree programme.

197 Dahler-Larsen, P. (2012). The Evaluation Society. Stanford University Press.
198 J M Consulting Ltd. (2006). Future needs for capital funding in higher education: A review of the future of SRIF and

learning and teaching capital. www.hefce.ac.uk/news/newsarchive/2015/2006capitalreport/
199 McGettigan, A. (2013). The Great University Gamble: Money, markets and the future of higher education. Pluto Press.

68

The pressures to incorporate metrics into research assessment within universities may have originated
in response to external forces – government policy, constrained funding and globalisation – but they
have also assumed an internal life and dynamic within institutions. Some information-gathering
exercises are voluntary, while others are the result of policy requirements or are motivated by the need
to compete e.g. for students.
This chapter will focus on how the adoption of metric-based modes of assessment by universities has
affected internal processes and research management practices within institutions. It will focus in
particular on analysing the characteristics of university league tables and rankings, with a view to
suggesting some ways forward in this area.

6.1.

The use of indicators in HEI management

A recent European Commission report200 provides a useful overview of the types of research
assessment that are gathered, organised by the range of ‘target’ users of such information. These user
groups include governments and government agencies, academic organisations, industrial partners,
civic organisations, peer HEIs, benefactors and alumni, potential employees and students, and of
course the originating HEI.
Within HEIs themselves (the focus of this chapter), the target users can be broken into three sub-sets,
reflecting different tiers of management: (1) governing bodies or councils; (2) executives and
university-level managers; (3) research groupings within universities (e.g. faculty and departmental
heads). These sub-groups have extensive and overlapping needs for assessment information to
underpin policy and planning, strategy-setting, investor confidence, quality assurance, publicity,
student and academic recruitment, and benchmarking.
Alis Oancea (who spoke at our Warwick workshop) offers a helpful framework for thinking about
research assessment strategies201 at different levels and scales: see Figure 2.

200 Expert group on assessment of University-based research. (2010). Assessing Europe’s University-Based Research.

http://ec.europa.eu/research/science-society/document_library/pdf_06/assessing-europe-university-based-research_en.pdf
201 The slides for this talk are available at:

www.hefce.ac.uk/media/hefce/content/news/Events/2015/HEFCE,metrics,workshop,Warwick/16%20Jan%20A%20Oancea
%20metrics%20rankings%20and%20governance.pdf. Retrieved 1 June 2015.

69

Figure 2: Vocabulary for metrics at a range of levels and scales202

To meet these information needs HEIs are turning to various forms of metrics to characterise
institutional performance, including in research. The types and sources of such metrics are diverse203
and practices at different institutions vary considerably.
These various datasets, or in most HEIs subsets thereof, are collected through various means,
often including internal and external sources. For example citation counts tend to be collected
from external databases such as Scopus, Web of Science or Google Scholar. However in
external databases, the association of author with HEI tends not to be robust. HEIs normally
combine their own staff lists with externally sourced citation data to get the most accurate

202 Oancea, A. (2015). Universities and Society: Research Impacts and Ecologies of Value. Keynote address. European

Foundation for Management Development, Higher Education Research Conference, 4 June 2015.
203 Including: Counts of research publications/outputs; Research outputs per academic, Citation counts; Number of invited

keynote addresses; Awards/prizes; International visiting research appointments; Editorships in ‘prestigious’ journals.
External research income; Number and percentage of grants won; Research income per FTE; Total R&D investment;
Employability of PhD graduates; Research students per research-active staff; PhD completions; Number/percentage of
research-active staff; Commercialisation of IP; End user esteem; Number of collaborations/partnerships; Research
infrastructure (number of labs, library and computing facilities).

70

picture of the institutional citation position (the problems associated with doing this authormatching are discussed in Section 2.5.1 of this report).
This however creates a problem for benchmarking: if an externally available institutional
citation position does not match the one that the institution itself creates then the externally
available benchmark data must also be called into question. To help address this situation there
has been a recent increase in the number of CRISs which have the potential to produce and
share benchmark data.
Looking at the three main HEI users of such metrics, while their needs vary, sometimes
markedly, between and within institutions, the following overview is suggested:
(1) Governing bodies or councils tend to be interested in institutional level compound
metrics either over time or relative to comparator institutions, or both. For example they
are more likely to be interested in the top-level view of an institution. Have we gone up in
league table X since last year, or are we above our benchmark institutions in league table
Y; and if not, why not? Perhaps leaving the detail to the university executive;
(2) Executives and university-level managers are more likely to drill down into the
components of the league tables, looking for areas of poor performance compared to
benchmark institutions, for example weak citation counts, or external research income, or
international faculty mix. This information is likely to feed into strategic investment
decisions and institutional culture development, for example encouraging publication in
higher profile outlets, or incentivising external research bids, or actively trying to recruit
international faculty;
(3) Research groupings within universities may have targets set by the centre in terms
of metrics and wish to be able to track (demonstrate) their progress towards them. In a
more devolved scenario, a research group may develop their own research strategy and
just having the metrics visible to colleagues can act as a reminder as to where efforts
might be focused.
All of these needs are of course overlapping, and hopefully complimentary. Specifically in the
UK there are pressures for research managers to provide additional information to help inform
strategic decisions. There is no suggestion that metrics should be used in isolation but there is
a growing trend to include them in order to make the decision-making process as evidencebased as possible. Having up to date and accurate research information also allows institutions
to meet the various requirements of funders with regard to issues such as publication-funder
acknowledgement and reporting, open access, and of course impact, academic and otherwise.

71

6.1.1.

Commercial platforms

Within this context, a number of players have emerged to provide platforms, research information
systems and data collection and analysis services to support institutional research management and
metrics-driven decision making; some examples are provided in Section 2.4. These include CRISs
provided by commercial providers, and analytical services from consultancies, academic bibliometric
institutes and altmetrics providers. Commercial solutions such as these are complemented – and
perhaps challenged – by the emergence of free services such as Google Scholar and Microsoft
Academic Search, providing alternatives and competition within this growing marketplace.
Taken together, these services increasingly allow institutions to benchmark themselves against others
in a number of performance dimensions. At the local level, approaches and methodologies appear to
differ considerably, with no one tool or approach being universally adopted. There are therefore
natural limits to the ability of institutions to assess relative performance against what are increasingly
contested benchmarks. By way of illustration, the following was written in a US context, but is also
relevant to the UK:

“ Standardized processes are not available to connect, evaluate and share credible
research performance data between universities. Standard definitions and
information management systems are often available at the institutional level but
tend to be unique to the individual university and of value only in evaluating
changes in performance over time. When comparative benchmarking takes place it
is often as a snapshot of a point in time and is not performed on an ongoing basis,
so the university then returns to internal comparisons of progress on a yearly
basis.” 204
Faced with a complex information collection regime (as described by the Higher Education Data &
Information Improvement Programme, HEDIIP205), it is perhaps not surprising that institutions have
increasingly come to rely on off-the-shelf commercial solutions, which has raised the question about
whether there are risks to the information infrastructure within institutions becoming dominated by
commercial providers. Partly driven by this, and partly by the need for greater consistency and
transparency, the growing need for open technologies and standards has risen up the agendas of
institutions, public research funders and information professionals. Cameron Neylon provides an
outline discussion of this topic (and an ambitious suggestion that the research community gather
together around some common principles) in a recent blog post, Principles for Open Scholarly

204 US Research Universities Futures Consortium. (2013). The current state and recommendations for meaningful academic

research metrics among American research universities. www.researchuniversitiesfutures.org/us-research-metrics-workinggroup-current-state-and-recommendations-oct2013.pdf. Retrieved 1 March 2015.
205 www.hediip.ac.uk/

72

Infrastructures.206 This is not a new debate – moves towards open scholarly infrastructures and
standards have been taking place for many years (the emergence of NISO standards being one of the
more visible examples) – but the increasing adoption of metrics and the growing role of commercial
or proprietary systems in this space has brought the issue to the fore.

6.2. University rankings and league tables
One of the most obvious outcomes of the greater interest in and drive towards data-driven decisionmaking is the burgeoning influence of league tables and rankings which compare universities on the
basis of a variety of indicators, some of which are linked to research. The indicators used, and the
weightings attributed to them vary between different rankings, and the methodologies underpinning
many systems are often ‘black-boxed’ or not made public, although they are coming under increasing
pressure to do so (either in response to broader endeavours from governments and others to increase
transparency, or in response to specific initiatives such as U-Multirank207).
However, even when criteria are made public, they underline the problematic way in which these
types of metric are being used (see below). Some HEIs effectively outsource crucial aspects of
performance management to league table providers, by incorporating their rank position as a specific
organisational target. For example, the first performance indicator in the University of Manchester’s
‘2020 Vision’ strategic plan is “To be in the top 25 of the Shanghai Jiao Tong Academic Ranking of
World Universities by 2020.” 208 Other institutions link VC and senior management remuneration and
bonuses to league table results. There are also examples of institutions (mostly outside the UK)
incentivising behaviour to influence their position in specific league tables, for example by offering
financial rewards to researchers for publication in Nature and Science, or awarding nominal ‘visiting
faculty’ status to highly cited researchers from universities in other countries.209
Ellen Hazelkorn210 has given a comprehensive description and analysis of university rankings,
including describing their evolution in relation to four phases of development (since 1900),
culminating in the emergence of supra-national rankings since 2008. We now have ten major global

206 Bilder G., Lin J. and Neylon C. (2015).
207 www.umultirank.org/. Retrieved 28 June 2015.
208 www.manchester.ac.uk/discover/vision/
209 http://scholarlykitchen.sspnet.org/2011/04/07/paying-for-impact-does-the-chinese-model-make-sense/;

https://www.timeshighereducation.co.uk/news/secondary-affiliations-lift-king-abdulaziz-university-inrankings/2014546.article ; www.dailycal.org/2014/12/05/citations-sale/. Retrieved 28 June 2015.
210 As discussed by Hazelkorn in a presentation delivered to the World Bank ‘The Obsession with Rankings in Tertiary

Education: Implications for Public Policy’. January 2015. Available at https://hepru.files.wordpress.com/2015/01/theobsession-with-rankings-in-tertiary-education_wb_0115.pdf. Retrieved 1 June 2015.

73

rankings and more than 150 national/specialist rankings. Two of these (Webometrics and UMultirank) are government-sponsored:



Academic Ranking of World Universities (ARWU) (Shanghai Jiao Tong University,
China), 2003;



Webometrics (Spanish National Research Council, Spain), 2004;



National Taiwan University Rankings (formerly Performance Ranking of Scientific
Papers for Research Universities, HEEACT), 2007;



Leiden Ranking (Centre for Science and Technology Studies, University of Leiden),
2008;



SCImago Journal and Country Rank (SJR) (Spain), 2009;



University Ranking by Academic Performance (URAP) (Informatics Institute of
Middle East Technical University, Turkey), 2009;



QS World University Rankings (Quacquarelli Symonds, UK), 2010;



THE World University Ranking (Times Higher Education, UK), 2010;



U-Multirank (European Commission, Brussels), 2014;



Best Global Universities rankings (USNWR, US), 2014.

A broad range of users takes notice of such league tables, including students, the public, government
and institutions themselves. Within institutions, Hazelkorn reports that 84% of HEIs have a formal
internal mechanism to review their institution’s rank; in 40% of institutions this review is led by the
vice-chancellor, president or rector.
Hazelkorn notes that there are some advantages associated with such rankings schemes, notably that:
they provide a simple, quick and easy way to measure and compare higher education performance;
they place higher education within a wider and global context and they may lead to improvement of
performance. She also argues, however, that the biggest consumers are students, the public and
government, all of whom are likely to be most negatively influenced by the results conveyed. The
disadvantages of rankings are numerous; in particular, there are serious concerns around the methods
and often arbitrary weightings used to underpin global rankings, and there is also widespread

74

scepticism about the tendency to compare whole universities (often in very different contexts), using
single, aggregate, and often poorly explained scores.211
The rise of university league tables might be seen as the embodiment of international standards but
each one is different so in reality a common standard of comparison has yet to emerge. Close
inspection reveals varying degrees of arbitrariness in the weighting of different components in
different league tables. The aggregate scores suffer from the same problems of all composite
indicators in that their meaning or value is not clear.212 Also, no effort is made to estimate errors and,
with rare exceptions,213 there is no clear acknowledgement that they might exist. Ranking in fact
magnifies differences beyond statistical significance.214 Rankings assume degrees of objectivity,
authority and precision that are not yet possible to achieve in practice, and to date have not been
properly justified by vendors.
Considering research more specifically, Hazelkorn notes a number of implications arising from the
use of league tables, performance indicators and quantitative measures. The central problem identified
here is that academic quality is a complex notion that cannot easily be reduced to quantification – the
use of proxy variables runs the risk of misrepresenting the qualities of research contributions and may
lead to unintended consequences. She contests that there is considerable difficulty obtaining
meaningful indicators and comparative data (nationally and internationally), and that the adoption of
rankings serves to embed a metrics culture and to down-weight features of research or teaching
quality that cannot easily be captured with numbers. This is a perspective echoed by the European
Commission’s expert group on research assessment: “Unintended consequences can occur when
indicators are taken in isolation and simple correlations are made. This may include overconcentrating on research, favouring particular disciplines of allocating resources and realigning
priorities to match indicators.” 215

211 In this context, the Times Higher Education should be commended for their current moves towards greater transparency

and openness in terms of the indicators used to rank universities. However, it is not clear how familiar users within
university management are with methodologies when they are made available. The methodological details are rarely
mentioned in Times Higher Education news stories built on the league tables’ transparency, for instance.
212 Gingras. Y. (2014). Criteria for evaluating indicators. In Cronin, B. and Sugimoto, B. Beyond Bibliometrics: Harnessing

multidimensional indicators of scholarly impact. Cambridge, MA, MIT.
213 For example, as argued by Phil Baty, in Baty, P. (2014). The Times Higher Education World University Rankings, 2004-

2012. Ethics in Science and Environmental Politics. 13 (2), 125–130. http://doi.org/10.3354/esep00145
214 Goldstein, H. and Spiegelhalter, D. (1996). League Tables and Their Limitations: Statistical Issues in Comparisons of

Institutional Performance. Journal of the Royal Statistical Society. Series A (Statistics in Society). 159 (3), 385-443.
Available at www.bristol.ac.uk/media-library/sites/cmm/migrated/documents/statistical-issues-for-league-tables1.pdf.
Retrieved 1 June 2015.
215 European Commission expert group on assessment of university-based research, p21.

75

Further, the use of such indicators is felt by many to risk reinforcing a hierarchical system of
institutions that may lead to simplistic comparisons. Such comparisons are hard to justify when
aggregate scores show statistically insignificant differences – indeed, an over-emphasis on a small set
of indicators risks encouraging perverse behaviour within and across institutions. Comparisons
between institutions may lead to an unhelpful focus on the ‘top’ universities worldwide and foster a
narrow definition of excellence; such a focus is not likely to be relevant to the institutional goals of
universities, where the balance of research and teaching, the geographical focus and disciplinary
distinctiveness may vary considerably. In fact, one of the specific concerns associated with rankings is
their tendency to rely on certain bibliometric and citation databases, such as Scopus or WoS, which,
as discussed in Chapter 3, benefit or disadvantage certain disciplines and types of research, ignoring
the important role that distinctiveness can play in an institution’s research and teaching missions.
Thus, there is considerable concern that rankings “can misinform and mislead when used to influence
decision-making by governments, universities and other stakeholders.” 216
All current rankings remain problematic to varying degrees, and further, only a very small percentage
of the globe’s universities and colleges feature within these listings.217 We need to continue observing
who undertakes rankings, how, and why, and to monitor the effects they may have. Furthermore,
rankings should be fully transparent, and more closely aligned to the sort of information that is of real
use to the higher education sector, with clear attempts made to avoid perverse effects.

6.2.1.

Future uses of rankings and league tables

A key issue with university rankings is that they command a great deal of attention thanks to vigorous
promotion. Furthermore, as many international students made choices on the basis of ranking
positions, there are strong pressures for HEIs to focus on these metrics.
Although there is competition between vendors in this sector, the extant products are all vulnerable to
Hazelkorn’s critique and valid alternatives have yet to emerge: their use takes place partly due to the
absence of alternatives. Faced with the challenge of objective and comparative performance
assessment, rankings are easy measures to find and to use. As the US Research Universities Futures
Consortium report notes:

“ Universities have a difficult time objectively assessing their comparative research
strengths and weaknesses in relation to their peers on both a program level as well
as an institutional basis. This is not to say they do not collect data and construct
positive narratives about how well they are doing, mostly as a means of self-

216 Ibid. p20.
217 US Research Universities Futures Consortium. (2013). p7.

76

promotion. The result is that rather than having the ability to conduct objective
analysis of their comparative productivity internally, institutions turn to external
consultants to provide guidance on strategic planning decisions. Consultants often
only have access to public information about other universities, as biased as that
might be, but they have the time and experience in evaluating performance between
universities.” 218
In response to this challenge, it is felt by many that universities and others should not delegate
important judgements on quality to external ranking organisations, perhaps especially when these
organisations have commercial interests to promote the validity of their products or where senior
leaders from particular HEIs are influencing the design of such rankings. It is worth noting that the
data assembled by the various rankers are often not subject to rigorous peer review or external input
and critique, and the emphases of rankings on particular features (such as research) at the expense of
others are not often drawn out in the broad analyses.
In this context, it may be sensible to suggest some measures to improve how rankings and league
tables are to be used most effectively to support university leadership, governance and management.
The most important and immediate suggestion here is that HEIs should make efforts to explain the
reasons for using rankings – in particular whether they are using these as a means to achieve particular
ends (and what these are), or whether the reverse is true. In particular they should explain to staff how
rankings information is being used to inform the balance between academic activities, with an
emphasis on explaining how the implications for those activities not captured in rankings are being
managed. Transparency is vital.
In the medium term, initiatives such as Snowball and the work of the above US consortium may both
offer possible ways forward for developing more locally sensitive performance indicators. As the US
consortium notes, there is a growing need for “reliable and actionable performance data to guide
strategic planning. Such data would allow evidence-based resource allocation decisions that can be
made and justified, and ensure that universities that are especially effective in turning inputs into
noteworthy research discoveries are widely recognised.” 219 As with Snowball, this suggests that the
optimal solution to the challenge of measuring performance would be a bottom-up collaborative
approach220 that allows universities to identify those indicators that best align with their institutional

218 Ibid. p11.
219 Ibid. p5.
220 This is the U-Multirank approach which uses ‘like with like’ comparisons. However, as institutions are required to opt in

and supply data, many missing institutions are not featured which reduces utility. In the 30 March 2015 data it was reported
that only 12 UK HEIs ‘fully participated’; see www.universityworldnews.com/article.php?story=2015033009083650.
Retrieved 1 June 2015.

77

mission, rather than a top-down or government-mandated approach. In moving toward this, it will be
important for institutional managers to ensure that this bottom-up approach is done transparently
within the institution and with the involvement of academic staff.

78

7. Cultures of counting
“ A decision made by the numbers (or by explicit rules of some other sort) has at least
the appearance of being fair and impersonal. Scientific objectivity thus provides an
answer to a moral demand for impartiality and fairness. Quantification is a way of
making decisions without seeming to decide. Objectivity lends authority to officials
who have very little of their own.”
Theodore M. Porter221
Across the higher education sector, quantitative data is now used far more widely as a management
aid, reflecting developments in the private sector over recent decades. As described in the previous
chapter, most universities now plan resource allocation centrally, often drawing on the advice of
dedicated intelligence and analysis units that gather information from departments and faculties. The
use of such systems has helped universities to strengthen their reputation as responsible, wellmanaged institutions. The relatively robust financial position of the sector, and the continued trust
placed in universities by public funders to manage their own affairs, is in part founded on such
perceptions of sound financial governance.
The extent to which management systems in HEIs help or hinder institutional success is of course
contested. On the positive side, such systems have helped to make decision making fairer and more
transparent, and allowed institutions to tackle genuine cases of underperformance. At the same time,
many within academia resist moves towards greater quantification of performance management on the
grounds that these will erode academic freedoms and the traditional values of universities. There is of
course a proper place for competition in academic life, but there are also growing concerns about an
expansion in the number and reach of managers, and the distortions that can be created by systems of
institutionalized audit.
In the research arena, this debate often focuses on finding an appropriate balance between curiositydriven and more directly applied forms of investigation. Linked to this, the impact agenda – both
prospectively, as a part of research grant applications, and retrospectively, in the form of the impact
case studies that were introduced to the REF in 2014 – is perceived by some as incentivising more
applied research, even though this is not the stated intention of research funders.
Uneasiness over the growth of audit, quantification and competition within higher education is
reflected in recent high-profile contributions by scholars such as Stefan Collini and Thomas

221 Porter, T. M. (1995) Trust in Numbers: The Pursuit of Objectivity in Science and Public Life. Princeton University Press.

79

Docherty.222 We have also seen the emergence of grassroots groups, such as the Council for the
Defence of British Universities and the Campaign for the Public University, arguing for the continued
autonomy of HEIs and a halt to a perceived drift towards instrumentalism and marketisation. Further
critique has focused on the REF, initially around the introduction of its assessment of impact, but
more recently around the continued validity of the broader exercise.223 One prominent voice in this
discussion is Derek Sayer, whose polemic Rank Hypocrisies: The Insult of the REF has stimulated
debate.224 Related concerns are expressed in a number of the responses to our call for evidence.225
A recurrent concern is that research managers can become over-reliant on indicators that are widely
felt to be problematic or not properly understood (e.g. JIFs), or on indicators that may be used
insensitively or inappropriately (e.g. research income targets), and these are driving managerial
approaches in a way that does not fully recognise the diverse contributions of individual researchers to
the overall institutional mission or the wider public good. Prominent examples include widespread
suspicions (and some anecdotal reports) that research managers made decisions about which papers to
include in the institution’s REF submission on the basis of the JIF metric alone.
In this case, a reliance on JIFs by decision-makers might be reinforced by the attitudes and behaviours
of academics themselves, but irrespective of this point, the primary issue remains: metrics are widely
seen as absolving research managers of the responsibility for making assessments based on more
accurate and complete information, and as contributing to mistrust of research management more
generally.
It is beyond the scope of this report to resolve all of these issues; they cut across broader aspects of
higher education policy and culture, and there are enough counter-examples of the positive use of
metrics-informed decision-making to argue for a more evidence-based approach. However, perceived
shifts within the sector towards greater accountability for public funding, the closer alignment of
research strategies and institutional competitiveness, and the broader emergence of market forces in
research and education, must be taken into account in any assessment of the broader consequences for
academic culture of relying on particular indicators.

222 See Collini, S. (2012). What are universities for? London, Penguin; and Docherty, T. (2014). Universities at War.

London, SAGE.
223 See, for example, a letter to the Times Higher Education from Lord Stern of Brentford and Sir Paul Nurse.

https://www.timeshighereducation.co.uk/comment/letters/its-our-duty-to-assess-the-costs-of-theref/2017479.article?storyCode=2017479
224 Sayer, D. (2015) Rank hypocrisies: The insult of the REF. London, SAGE.
225 e.g. Meera Sabaratnam and Paul Kirby’s response: http://thedisorderofthings.com/2014/06/16/why-metrics-cannot-

measure-research-quality-a-response-to-the-hefce-consultation/. Retrieved 28 June 2015.

80

Some of the disquiet over these developments is reflected in the findings of the Best University
Workplace Survey 2015. This reveals a gulf between the views of academics and administrators, and
reports that many academics feel overworked and taken advantage of.226 Indeed, the experience of
many academics might most neatly be characterised by a quote from one physicist in Australia: “The
metrics have gone absolutely berserk….” 227
This chapter takes a closer look at these issues and how they relate to individual researchers,
beginning with an overview of what is known about the effects of evaluative metrics in research
practices, including strategic behaviour and goal displacement, task reduction, and potential biases
against interdisciplinarity. This is followed by a discussion of empirical research on institutional
responses to metrics-based assessments, and the relationship between indicators and knowledge
production. Lastly, we consider the equality and diversity implications of an increasing reliance on
metrics for research management, assessment and decision-making.

7.1.

Games without frontiers?

“ The use of indicators will inevitably have effects on the systems measured,
signalling desired outcomes and producing behaviours, whether intended or
otherwise, and making a difference to lives and careers.”
Ismael Rafols, Sussex workshop228
No research assessment regime is completely benign; there will always be the potential for strategic
behaviours and gaming.229 Researchers are not passive recipients of research evaluation but play an
active role in assessment contexts.230 Therefore any system used to assess research, whether peer
review or indicator-based, that affects money or reputation will tend to influence researchers’
behaviour in two ways.231

226 Parr, C. (2015). Best University Workplace Survey 2015: results and analysis. 5 February 2015.

www.timeshighereducation.co.uk/features/best-university-workplace-survey-2015-results-and-analysis/2018272.article.
227 Quoted in Gill, J. (2015). Measure still for measure? 5 February 2015.

www.timeshighereducation.co.uk/comment/leader/measure-still-for-measure/2018343.article
228 Rafols’ slides are available at

www.hefce.ac.uk/media/hefce/content/news/Events/2014/Metrics,we,trust/Ismael%20Rafols%20Slides%20In%20Metrics%20we%20Trust.pdf
229 cf. MacRoberts, M.H., and MacRoberts, B.R. (1989). Problems of citation analysis: A critical review. Journal of the

American Society for Information Science. 40 (5), 342-349.
230 cf. Aksnes, D. W., and Rip, A. (2009). Researchers’ perceptions of citations. Research Policy. 38 (6), 895-905; Van

Noorden, R. (2010). Metrics: A profusion of measures. Nature. 465 (7300), 864–866.
231 Butler, L. (2007). Assessing university research: a plea for a balanced approach. Science and Public Policy. 34 (8), 565–

574. DOI:10.3152/030234207X254404.

81

The first is goal displacement: high scores in the measures become the goal rather than a means of
measuring whether an objective (or performance level) has been attained.232 The second is a change in
the research process itself in response to assessment criteria, which may be more difficult to
recognise, for instance through a shift towards more mainstream, less risky research topics.233
Goal displacement has been highlighted by studies that looked at the effects of funding and evaluation
regimes on the production of scholarly publications. For instance, Butler analysed the introduction of
quantitative performance indicators in Australian research funding allocation.234 She shows that there
is a sharp rise in ISI-ranked publications in all university fields (but not in other branches of research
where this type of funding allocation is not present) when funding is linked to publications.235 Since
the Australian evaluation system did not differentiate between publications (besides being peerreviewed or not), the number of publications especially rose in journals that are easier to get published
in. Earlier research by Butler shows that while the relative global share of Australian publications rose
as a result of this strategy, their academic impact (measured in citations) declined during the same
period.236

The Council of Canadian Academies study concludes that linking funding explicitly to research
output (in terms of the number of publications) may lead researchers to produce a higher quantity of
publications at the expense of quality.237 Similar effects of the use of bibliometrics on the quantities of
publications have been found in Spain,238 Sweden,239 Denmark240 and Norway.241

232 Council of Canadian Academies (2012). p27.
233 Butler, L. (2007). p572.
234 Butler, L. (2003). Explaining Australia’s increased share of ISI publications – the effects of a funding formula based on

publication counts. Research Policy. 32 (1), 143-155; Butler, L. (2005). What happens when funding is linked to publication
counts? In: Moed, H., Glänzel, W., and Schmoch, U. (Eds.), Handbook of quantitative science and technology research (pp.
389-405). Dordrecht: Springer.
235 Butler, L. (2005).
236 Butler, L. (2003).
237 Council of Canadian Academies (2012). p26.
238 Jiménez-Contreras, E., de Moya Anegón, F. and López-Cózar, E. D. (2003). The evolution of research activity in Spain:

The impact of the National Commission for the Evaluation of Research Activity (CNEAI). Research Policy, 32(1), 123-142.
239 Hammarfelt, B., and de Rijcke, S. (2015). Accountability in context: Effects of research evaluation systems on

publication practices, disciplinary norms and individual working routines in the faculty of Arts at Uppsala University,
Research Evaluation, 24, 63-77.
240 Ingwersen, P. and Larsen, B. (2014). Influence of a performance indicator on Danish research production and citation

impact 2000–12. Scientometrics. 101(12), 1325-1344.
241 Ossenblok, T. L., Engels, T. C., and Sivertsen, G. (2012). The representation of the social sciences and humanities in the

Web of Science—a comparison of publication patterns and incentive structures in Flanders and Norway (2005–2009).
Research Evaluation. 21(4), 280-290.

82

UK publication patterns between 1985 and 2003 suggest that specific publication patterns emerged in
the years before three RAEs in that period (1992, 1996, 2001), depending on whether the RAE limited
the number of publications submitted per academic FTE. In the UK, accounts of “playing the RAE
game” 242 in this way are numerous.243 Another study of the RAE shows that the cumulative research
productivity of individuals increased over time, but the effects differed across departments and
individuals. Where researchers in higher-ranked programmes increased their output in higher-quality
journals, researchers in lower-ranked departments aimed at increasing their publications in outlets
considered as less prestigious.244 A survey among journal editors conducted at the end of the 1990s
also showed that the RAE influenced where authors published. Indeed, research shows that the status
of a journal is crucial for academics’ submission decisions.245 The fear that the RAE would lead to
salami-slicing of research outputs into “least publishable units” 246 was not confirmed.247

However, it isn’t always entirely evident what distinguishes gaming from strategising.248 Partly for
this reason, the evidence base on gaming specific indicators remains fairly undeveloped.249 It is of
course possible, indeed common, for strategic research management to be genuinely constructive. For
example, one outcome of REF2014 is likely to be, in many institutions, the introduction of new

242 Harley, S. (2002). The impact of research selectivity on academic work and identity in UK universities. Studies in Higher

Education. 27 (2), 187-205.
243 Hare, P. G. (2003). The United Kingdom’s Research Assessment Exercise: impact on institutions, departments,

individuals. Higher Education Management and Policy. 15, 43-62; Keenoy, T. (2005). Facing Inwards and Outwards at
Once: The liminal temporalities of academic performativity. Time & Society. 14 (2-3), 303-321; Alldred, P., and Miller, T.
(2007). Measuring what’s valued or valuing what’s measured? Knowledge production and the Research Assessment
Exercise. In: Gillies, V., and Lucey, H. (eds.) Power, Knowledge and the Academy: The Institutional Is Political (pp. 147167). Basingstoke: Palgrave; Sousa, S. B., and Brennan, J. L. (2014). The UK Research Excellence Framework and the
Transformation of Research Production. In: Musselin, C., and Teixeira, P. (eds.), Reforming Higher Education (pp. 65-80).
Dordrecht: Springer.
244 Moore, W. J., Newman, R. J., Sloane, P. J., and Steely, J. D. (2002). Productivity effects of research assessment

exercises. University of Aberdeen, Department of Economics.
245 Harley, D., Acord, S. K., Earl-Novell, S., Lawrence, S., and King, C. J. (2010). Assessing the future landscape of

scholarly communication: An exploration of faculty values and needs in seven disciplines. Center for Studies in Higher
Education. Retrieved November 29, 2014, from https://escholarship.org/uc/item/15x7385g; Chew, M., Villanueva, E. V.,
and Van Der Weyden, M. B. (2007). Life and times of the impact factor: retrospective analysis of trends for seven medical
journals (1994-2005) and their Editors’ views. Journal of the Royal Society of Medicine. 100 (3), 142-150.
246 cf. Huth, E. J. (1986). Irresponsible authorship and wasteful publication. Annals of Internal Medicine. 104(2), 257-259.

247 Georghiou, L., et al. (2000). Impact of the Research Assessment Exercise and the Future of Quality Assurance in the
Light of Changes in the Research Landscape. Manchester: Policy Research in Engineering, Science and Technology
Retrieved November 29, 2014, from https://research.mbs.ac.uk/INNOVATION/Portals/0/docs/raec.pdf
248 McRae, A. (2015). What’s the difference between ‘game-playing’ and ‘strategizing’? More on the REF.

https://headofdepartmentblog.wordpress.com/2015/02/24/whats-the-difference-between-game-playing-and-strategizingmore-on-the-ref/
249 Such matters were discussed at a conference, ‘Weighed and measured: how metrics shape publication (mis)behaviour’,

http://publicationethics.org/cope-european-seminar-and-workshop-2015

83

measures to improve the quality of the research environment by providing better research facilities,
freeing up researchers’ time, and supporting career development in a variety of ways.

7.2.

Biases against interdisciplinarity

A related concern is the potential influence of research assessment on interdisciplinary research. An
early survey of the impact of the 1996 RAE reported evidence of negative effects for interdisciplinary
work. Nearly half of those in management positions felt the RAE “had hindered” interdisciplinarity.250
These effects differ by discipline: for example, one survey of demographers showed no tendency to
focus on monodisciplinary research in terms of reading or publishing activity.251 In economics and
business studies, however, publication strategies have been strongly stimulated by the ubiquitous use
of journal rankings, such as the one produced annually by the Chartered Association of Business
Schools.252 These lists are not based on citations but on a qualitative consensus about the ‘top’
journals. A comparative analysis by Rafols et al. of the effect of these rankings in business and
innovation studies found them to be biased against interdisciplinary work.253 That study concludes
that citation indicators may be more suitable than peer review for interdisciplinary work because
criteria of excellence are too tightly based on narrow disciplinary standards.
Pontille and Torny analysed three journal lists in the humanities and social sciences, produced by the
Australian Research Council (ARC), the European Science Foundation (ESF), and the French Agency
for Evaluation Research and Higher Education (AERES).254 They found that the production of journal
ratings is a highly political task, and not merely a matter of inventory-making. The modalities that
were selected produced very different effects in terms of which academic communities were involved,
how boundaries were drawn around disciplines, and the ways in which revision processes adopted
criticism from the fields involved.255 The ARC decided to drop journal rankings from its assessment

250 Mcnay, I. (1998). The Research Assessment Exercise (RAE) and after: “You never know how it will all turn out.”

Perspectives: Policy and Practice in Higher Education. 2 (1), 19–22, p20.
251 Van Dalen, H. P., and Henkens, K. (2012). Intended and unintended consequences of a publish‐or‐perish culture: A

worldwide survey. Journal of the American Society for Information Science and Technology. 63 (7), 1282-1293.
252 http://charteredabs.org/academic-journal-guide-2015/. Retrieved 28 June 2015.
253 Rafols, I., Leydesdorff, L., O’Hare, A., Nightingale, P., and Stirling, A. (2012). How journal rankings can suppress

interdisciplinary research: A comparison between innovation studies and business & management. Research Policy. 41 (7),
1262-1282.
254 Pontille, D., and Torny, D. (2010). The controversial policies of journal ratings: Evaluating social sciences and

humanities. Research Evaluation. 19 (5), 347-360.
255 See also Jensen, C. B. (2011). Making Lists, Enlisting Scientists. Science Studies. 24(2), 64-84.

84

system when research managers began to set publication targets on the basis of the two top categories
in its list.256

7.3.

Task reduction

Another concern is that researchers respond to assessment criteria by focusing tasks and narrowing
their types of publication. There has been some analysis of this issue in relation to the Australian ERA
initiative.257 In around half of the disciplines studied, the four publication types used in ERA were not
identical to the four publication types that researchers found most important. As one historian
expressed it: “The way we are funded now by the government, by the faculty, by the university, we
are severely discouraged from writing book reviews, we are severely discouraged from writing
reference articles, encyclopedia articles. I mean, if somebody asked me to do that now, I always say
no.” 258 The study concludes that arts and humanities are more affected by prescriptive modes of
assessment, as more journal-oriented disciplines serve as the archetype for evaluations.
Task reduction has also been reported in the social sciences. The survey of demographers (discussed
in the previous section) reports that traditional scholarly tasks – such as writing referee reports or
translating research outcomes for policymakers – are negatively affected by a drive for individual
productivity.259 A study of the RAE in 1996 similarly found that publication in professional journals
was “actively discouraged” by some managers.260 Hoecht argues that audit-based quality control has
replaced trust-based form of control in UK academia, which may negatively affect innovative
teaching and research practices.261 Similarly, Willmott argues that audit mechanisms push academics
towards mainstream topics that have the highest chance of being published in top-ranked journals.262
An exploratory study of UK university education departments shows that the use of performance
indicators in evaluation is perceived as rewarding specific forms of academic involvement – research

256 Council of Canadian Academies. (2012). p56.
257 Laudel, G., and Gläser, J. (2006). Tensions between evaluations and communication practices. Journal of Higher

Education Policy and Management. 28(3), 289-295.
258 Ibid. p294.
259 Van Dalen, H. P. and Henkens, K. (2012).
260 Mcnay, I. (1998). p22.
261 Hoecht, A. (2006). Quality assurance in UK higher education: Issues of trust, control, professional autonomy and

accountability. Higher Education. 51 (4), 541-563.
262 Willmott, H. (2011). Journal list fetishism and the perversion of scholarship: reactivity and the ABS

list. Organization. 18(4), 429-442.

85

and publications – that sit in tension with more public roles, including applied research, writing
professional publications, or teaching.263

7.4.

Effects on institutions and their employees

The use of metrics in research assessment has also affected institutional arrangements, and the
relationship between higher education and government.264 For example, the REF, like the RAE before
it, encourages more of a ‘transfer market’ for academic faculty in the UK. Some see this outcome as
‘unintentional’, others as desirable, in that it has increased the mobility of researchers between
institutions in positive ways.265 Some universities have focused on hiring early-career staff with
research potential, while others have taken a more conservative approach and focused on “wellestablished researchers.” 266
In Australia, there is evidence that universities responded to formula-based funding by more or less
mirroring this practice at an institutional level.267 Wouters hypothesises that such mirroring may be a
more general phenomenon, related to the way universities tend to transfer responsibility upwards and
downwards.268 Such strategic behaviour may have long-lasting effects on research agendas.
The demands of formal evaluation according to broadly standardised criteria are likely to focus the
attention system of organisations on satisfying them, and give rise to local lock-in mechanisms.269

263 Wilson, M., and Holligan, C. (2013). Performativity, work-related emotions and collective research identities in UK

university education departments: an exploratory study. Cambridge Journal of Education. 43(2), 223-241.
264 Martin, B., and Whitley, R. (2010). The UK Research Assessment Exercise: a case of regulatory capture. In: Whitley, R.,

Gläser, J., and Engwall, L. (eds.), Reconfiguring knowledge production: changing authority relationships in the sciences and
their consequences for intellectual innovation (pp. 51-80). Oxford, Oxford University Press.
265 Council of Canadian Academies. (2012); See also Elton, L. (2000). The UK research assessment exercise: unintended

consequences. Higher Education Quarterly. 54(3), 274-283.
266 Ibid. p27-28.
267 Gläser, J., Laudel, G., Hinze, S. and Butler, L. (2002). Impact of evaluation-based funding on the production of scientific

knowledge: What to worry about, and how to find out. Report for the German Ministry for Education and Research.
www.laudel.info/wp-content/uploads/2013/pdf/research%20papers/02expertiseglaelauhinbut.pdf. Retrieved November 29,
2014. p17.
268 Wouters, P. (2014). The Citation: From Culture to Infrastructure. In: Cronin, B., and Sugimoto, C.R. (eds.), Beyond

Bibliometrics: Harnessing Multidimensional Indicators of Scholarly Impact (pp. 47-66). Cambridge MA: MIT press.
269 cf. Van der Meulen, B. (2007). Interfering Governance and Emerging Centres of Control: University research evaluation

in the Netherlands. In: Whitley, R. and Gläser, J. (eds.), The Changing Governance of the Sciences (pp. 191-203). Dordrecht:
Springer.

86

But the extent to which mechanisms like evaluation actually control and steer loosely coupled systems
of academic knowledge is still poorly understood.270
Evidence of the performativity of quantitative data – their capacity to influence the activities they are
supposed merely to indicate – suggests that the availability of metrics creates a demand for such
information.271 Such information-generating functions carry authority even if their limitations are
known.272 Organisations cannot resist the temptation to collect such information because it is
considered strategically useful in managing and improving organisational performance. The fact that
competitors collect similar information for strategic purposes makes the prospect of opting out or
ignoring such information perilous.273 This tendency explains in part the lure of university league
tables, JIFs and, indeed, strategic approaches to the REF. The legitimacy of such indicators does not
rest exclusively on their first-order accuracy, but also on the fact that they are assumed to carry
authority within the institutional environments with which organisations strategically engage.
Conversely, empirical work on university rankings shows how, in complex academic settings,
performance metrics are not tightly coupled with actions across the entire organisation.274 Broader
changes in the character of universities as independent and critical institutions,275 as well as increased
levels of stress and anxiety among academics, are also reported in interview-based analyses.276
Burrows argues that performance-based control mechanisms are increasingly used outside their
original context of evaluation, contributing to feelings of powerlessness among academics, and

270 Gläser, J. (2013). How does Governance change research content? On the possibility of a sociological middle-range

theory linking science policy studies to the sociology of scientific knowledge. Berlin: The Technical University Technology
Studies Working Papers.
271 Porter, T. (1995). Trust in numbers: the pursuit of objectivity in science and public life. Princeton, NY: Princeton

University Press.
272 Dahler-Larsen, P. (2012). The evaluation society. Stanford CA: Stanford Business Books.
273 See also Espeland, W. N., and Sauder, M. (2007). Rankings and Reactivity: How Public Measures Recreate Social

Worlds. American Journal of Sociology, 113(1), 1-40.
274 cf. De Rijcke, S., Wallenburg, I., Bal, R. and Wouters, P. (forthcoming). Comparing Comparisons. On Rankings and

Accounting in Hospitals and Universities. In: Guggenheim, M., Deville, J., and Hrdlickova, Z. (eds.) Practising
Comparison: Logics, Relations, Collaborations. Manchester: Mattering Press.
275 Shore, C. (2008). Audit culture and Illiberal governance: Universities and the politics of accountability. Anthropological

Theory. 8(3), 278-298; Shore, C. (2010). Beyond the multiversity: neoliberalism and the rise of the schizophrenic university.
Social Anthropology, 18(1). 15-29; Craig, R., Amernic, J., and Tourish, D. (2014). Perverse Audit Culture and
Accountability of the Modern Public University. Financial Accountability & Management. 30(1), 1-24.
276 Chandler, J., Barry, J., and Clark, H. (2002). Stressing academe: The wear and tear of the new public management.

Human Relations. 55 (9), 1051-1069; Gill, R. (2009). Breaking the silence: The hidden injuries of neo-liberal academia.
Secrecy and silence in the research process: Feminist reflections, 228-244; Sá, C. M., Kretz, A., and Sigurdson, K. (2013).
Accountability, performance assessment, and evaluation: Policy pressures and responses from research councils. Research
Evaluation. 22 (2), 105-117. University and College Union (2014) UCU Survey of Workplace Stress
www.ucu.org.uk/media/pdf/t/a/ucu_stresssurvey14_summary.pdf. Retrieved 28 June 2015.

87

leading to an inappropriate emphasis on individual measures such as the h-index.277 The use of
metrics in decision-making contexts cannot be explained simply as explicit responses to top-down
commands. To some extent, metrics seem to transform more fundamentally ‘what can be talked
about’ and how valuations are made.278

7.5.

Effects on knowledge production

Emerging evidence suggests that performance-informed research assessment does indeed increase the
pressure on researchers and institutions to meet performance criteria, irrespective of whether these are
based on peer review or metrics. In part, these effects are intended: performance indicators became
more prominent in the governance of research explicitly to change production dynamics and to align
them with policy priorities.279 That the research community and other stakeholders respond
strategically may in turn have unintended effects: either through the mechanism of goal displacement
or through more structural changes in research priorities, publication activities, research capacity and
organisation.
Yet the evidence remains fragmented and sometimes contradictory. Systems that link performance to
funding have been studied in greatest detail, but whether a direct link is necessary for unintended
effects to occur is debatable. More influential than the amount of funding linked to performance
differences is the effect that it has on researcher reputations.280 Systems where performance is publicly
reported, but not directly linked to funding, may lead to comparable or identical effects.
As Butler notes, the conservatism of metrics users is a long-standing problem, creating a preference
for established or user-friendly measurements over more sophisticated or diverse metrics. Researchers
in the scientometric field are also increasingly concerned about the unintended effects that some
metrics are having in an era of expanding academic audit. 281 For instance, in 2012, one of the
leading journals – Scientometrics – produced a special issue concentrating on the uses and misuses

277 Burrows, R. (2012). Living with the h‐index? Metric assemblages in the contemporary academy. The Sociological

Review. 60 (2), 355-372.
278 cf. Espeland, W. N., and Stevens, M. L. (1998). Commensuration as a social process. Annual Review of Sociology. 24,

313-343; Lamont, M. (2012). Toward a Comparative Sociology of Valuation and Evaluation. Annual Review of Sociology.
38, 201-221.
279 Whitley, R., and Gläser, J. (eds.) (2007).
280 Hicks, D. (2012). Performance-based university research funding systems. Research Policy. 41(2), 251–261.
281 Van Dalen, H. P., and Henkens, K. (2012); Garfield, E. (1996); Garfield, E. (2006). The history and meaning of the

journal impact factor. JAMA. 295(1), 90-93; Weingart, P. (2005). Impact of bibliometrics upon the science system:
Inadvertent consequences? Scientometrics. 62(1), 117-131. Hicks, D., Wouters, P., Waltman, L., de Rijcke, S., and Rafols, I.
(2015). Bibliometrics: The Leiden Manifesto for research metrics. Nature. 520, 429-431.

88

of JIFs.282 Arguments against JIFs often cite their technical shortcomings, 283 and susceptibility to
“manipulation by journal editors and misuse by uncritical parties”.284
Emerging empirical evidence paints a more complex picture of how certain metrics, including JIFs,
become reified in research management, as both formal and informal standards against which to
assess the value and usefulness of research.285 First, such metrics are used to reinforce deep-seated,
firmly established mechanisms to build reputation and to hire, select and promote staff (including
publishing in high-JIF journals). Second, the responsibility for applying certain bibliometric indicators
is spread across many stakeholders in the current “citation infrastructure” 286 – including
scientometricians, publishers, librarians, policymakers, evaluators, research managers, consultancies,
researchers, and other users.287 As a result, reforming systems of research assessment is a distributed
and complex task.288
An exploratory study in Dutch biomedicine289 details the multiple ways that performance metrics
affect knowledge-production processes.290 The authors found that academic prestige was tightly
coupled with citation counts and indicators like JIFs and the h-index, in targeting specific publication
outlets, referencing ‘hot’ papers, and negotiation of authorship priority. Quantitative indicators were
also observed to feed into quite routine knowledge-producing activities, for example, discussions over

282 Braun, T. (2012). Editorial. Scientometrics. 92(2), 207-208.
283 cf. Moed, H. F., and Van Leeuwen, T. N. (1996). Impact factors can mislead. Nature. 381, 186.; Buela-Casal, G., and

Zych, I. (2012). What do the scientists think about the impact factor? Scientometrics, 92(2), 281-292.; Seglen, P. O. (1992).
The skewness of science. Journal of the American Society for Information Science. 43(9), 628-638.l; Seglen, P. O. (1994).
Causal relationship between article citedness and journal impact. Journal of the American Society for Information Science,
45 (1), 1-11.; Seglen, P. O. (1997). Why the impact factor of journals should not be used for evaluating research. British
Medical Journal, 314 (7079), 498-502.; Simons, K. (2008). The misused impact factor. Science. 322 (5899), 165-165.
284 Archambault, É., and Larivière, V. (2009). History of the journal impact factor: Contingencies and consequences.

Scientometrics. 79 (3), 635-649. p63.5.
285 Aksnes, D. W., and Rip, A. (2009). Researchers’ perceptions of citations. Research Policy. 38(6), 895-905.; Buela-Casal,

G., and Zych, I. (2012); Derrick, G., and Gillespie, J. (2013) "A number you just can’t get away from”: Characteristics of
Adoption and the Social Construction of Metric Use by Researchers. STI 18th International Conference on Science and
Technology Indicators. Berlin.; Sá, C. M., Kretz, A., and Sigurdson, K. (2013).; Stephan, P.E. (2012). How economics
shapes science. Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press.
286 Wouters, P. (2014).
287 De Rijcke, S. & Rushforth, A.D. (2015). To intervene, or not to intervene, is that the question? On the role of

scientometrics in research evaluation. Journal of the Association for Information Science and Technology, Article first
published online: 13 May 2015, DOI: 10.1002/asi.23382.
288 cf. Boltanski, L., and Thévenot, L. (2006). On justification: Economies of worth. Princeton, NJ: Princeton University

Press.; Linkova, M. (2014). Unable to resist: Researchers’ responses to research assessment in the Czech Republic. Human
Affairs. 24 (1), 78-88.; Stöckelová, T. (2014). Power at the Interfaces: The Contested Orderings of Academic Presents and
Futures in a Social Science Department. Higher Education Policy. 27(4), 435-451.
289 Rushforth, A. & De Rijcke, S. (2015). Accounting for Impact? The Journal Impact Factor and the Making of Biomedical

Research in the Netherlands. Minerva, 53, 117-139.
290 Colyvas, J. A. (2012). Performance Metrics as Formal Structures and through the Lens of Social Mechanisms: When Do

They Work and How Do They Influence? American Journal of Education. 118 (2), 167-197.

89

whom to collaborate with and how much additional time to spend in the laboratory producing data.
JIFs in particular functioned on occasions as screening devices for selecting useful information from
the overwhelming amounts of literature researchers could potentially read.
Generally speaking, the function of bibliometrics in ‘reducing complexity’ is frequently cited as a
reason for their ongoing appeal among research policymakers and managers.291 In evaluation contexts,
ranking tools like the JIF help to render the prestige from publishing in one journal comparable with
another.292 Many researchers are willing to wait longer on editorial decisions when the JIF is higher,
which shows the clogging effects JIFs can have on scholarly communication.293
Empirical research does however reveal a discrepancy between the importance of indicators in
evaluation practices and researchers’ own judgment of their accuracy.294 According to Hargens and
Schuman,295 researchers often have an ambivalent attitude with respect to citation indicators. Citations
are sought-after because they are part of the reward system and can be drawn upon in competitive
struggles, while at the same time they are criticised for not reflecting the actual contribution to
research.296 Such ‘folk citation theories’ do not have to be consistent in order to be mobilised by
researchers as explanatory devices in their competition for reputation. However, the sophistication
and complexity of researchers’ interpretations of citation should not be underestimated.297

7.6.

Equality and diversity concerns

In considering how metrics can affect research cultures, one important concern is that women, earlycareer researchers and other groups with protected characteristics (as defined in the Equality Act
2010298), might be negatively affected by an emphasis on particular indicators. 24 of the responses to
our call for evidence highlighted concerns in this area. Respondents also noted that any system of
assessment based on total citation numbers (such as an h-index) was likely to favour more established
researchers, as they would have had more time to produce articles and other outputs. A handful of

291 Cronin, B., and Sugimoto, C. R. (eds.). (2014). Beyond Bibliometrics: Harnessing Multidimensional Indicators of

Scholarly Impact. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.; Woelert, P. (2013). The ‘Economy of Memory’: Publications, Citations, and
the Paradox of Effective Research Governance. Minerva. 51(3), 341-362.
292 Espeland, W. N., and Stevens, M. L. (1998).
293 Rousseau, S., and Rousseau, R. (2012). Interactions between journal attributes and authors’ willingness to wait for

editorial decisions. Journal of the American Society for Information Science and Technology. 63 (6), 1213-1225.
294 Buela-Casal, G. and Zych, I. (2012).
295 Hargens, L. L., and Schuman, H. (1990). Citation counts and social comparisons: Scientists’ use and evaluation of

citation index data. Social Science Research. 19 (3), 205–221.
296 Aksnes, D. W. and Rip, A. (2009). Researchers’ perceptions of citations. Research Policy. 38(6), 895-905. p895.
297 Ibid. p904.
298 https://www.gov.uk/equality-act-2010-guidance. Retrieved 28 June 2015.

90

responses pointed out that the predominance of English-language publications in most academic fields
meant that those publishing in non-English outlets would be disadvantaged in terms of citations.
A recent study by the Nuffield Council on Bioethics on the culture of scientific research has
underlined some of these concerns.299 To explore these issues in greater depth, the review made
equality and diversity the focus of a one-day workshop on ‘Metrics for All?’ at the University of
Sheffield in December 2014.300 This drew contributions from 45 people, from across the academic
community, learned societies, research offices, sector bodies, equality and diversity officers and data
providers.
Points made at the Sheffield workshop included:



The need to humanise the metrics debate, and consider the likely effects of different
indicators and assessment structures on the diverse groups of people involved;



Metrics used to assess and measure higher education should examine a range of
levels and scales, whether institutions, departments or individuals;



Context is paramount – methodologies and ethical considerations should be adapted
to suit the scale of enquiry;



Attention should be paid to implicit biases, and further research on such biases and
their effects needs to be done;



Due consideration should be paid to the possible unintended consequences of
research assessment regimes, in terms of the potential to change behaviours across
different academic populations and scales of enquiry;



Particularly for early-career researchers, metrics can shape the character of academic
practice.

With regard to gender bias, there is a growing volume of evidence to underpin these concerns.301 As a
recent Nature paper by Sugimoto and colleagues observes, problems of gender inequality are still
widespread across the research community, whether in respect to hiring, earning, funding, satisfaction

299 Nuffield Council on Bioethics. (2014). The culture of scientific research in the UK. http://nuffieldbioethics.org/wp-

content/uploads/Nuffield_research_culture_full_report_web.pdf
300 www.hefce.ac.uk/news/Events/Name,101078,en.html. Retrieved 28 June 2015.

301

Savonick, D and Davidson, C. N. (2015) Gender Bias in Academe: An Annotated Bibliography of Important Recent
Studies. HASTAC Futures Initiative. www.hastac.org/blogs/superadmin/2015/01/26/gender-bias-academe-annotatedbibliography-important-recent-studies. Retrieved 28 June 2015.

91

or patenting.302 There has been considerable discussion of the ‘productivity puzzle’, whereby men
publish more papers on average than women, but debate continues as to whether this is caused by
gender bias, childbearing and caring responsibilities, other variables – or a combination of these.303

Sugimoto et al. present a global and cross-disciplinary bibliometric analysis of the relationship
between gender and research output across 5,483,841 research papers and articles with 27,329,915
authorships. They find that “in the most productive countries, all articles with women in dominant
author positions receive fewer citations than those with men in the same positions. And this citation
disadvantage is accentuated by the fact that women’s publication portfolios are more domestic than
their male colleagues – they profit less from the extra citations that international collaborations
accrue. Given that citations now play a central part in the evaluation of researchers, this situation can
only worsen gender disparities.” 304

Others studies suggest women are less likely to engage in self-citation. One recent study by
Bergstrom et al. analysed 1.6 million papers with 40 million citations, of which one million were from
scholars referring to their own work. They found that men were 56% more likely to cite their own
work. In some male-heavy fields, the gender gap was even more pronounced, for example
mathematics, where men were 84% more likely than women to self-cite.305

A widely discussed paper by Moss-Racusin et al. suggests that subtle gender biases may play a
significant role. Based on a nationwide sample of 127 biology, chemistry and physics professors, who
were asked to evaluate the application materials of an undergraduate science student, the study found
that “both male and female faculty judged a female student to be less competent and less worthy of
being hired than an identical male student, and also offered her a smaller starting salary and less
career mentoring.” 306

302 Sugimoto, C. et al. (2013) ‘Global gender disparities in science’. Nature. Vol 504: 211-213.

www.nature.com/news/bibliometrics-global-gender-disparities-in-science-1.14321. Retrieved 28 June 2015.
303 Leahey, E. (2007). Not by Productivity Alone: How Visibility and Specialization Contribute to Academic Earnings.

American Sociological Review 72. See also: https://www.timeshighereducation.co.uk/news/sexist-peer-review-causes-stormonline/2020001.article
304 Ibid. p.212.
305 www.the-scientist.com/?articles.view/articleNo/39450/title/Self-Citation-Gender-Gap/

Moss-Racusin, C. A., Dovidio, J. F., Brescoli, V. L., Graham, M. J. and Handelsman, J. (2012) ‘Science faculty’s subtle
gender biases favor male students’. PNAS vol.109, no.41, pp.16474-16479. www.pnas.org/content/109/41/16474.full.pdf.
Retrieved 28 June 2015.
306

92

Early career researchers can feel particular pressure to perform well against certain indicators. The
Nuffield Council on Bioethics noted in its study of research culture that, “Throughout…we heard
repeatedly that publishing in high impact factor journals is still thought to be the most important
element in determining whether researchers gain funding, jobs and promotions, along with articlelevel metrics such as citation numbers.” 307 Another recent study of almost 200 early career
researchers in the UK found that a focus on “REFable publications” had created “a huge amount of
pressure and anxiety, which impacts particularly on those at the bottom rung of the career ladder” and
contributed to a “two-tier hierarchy” between teaching and research staff.308

Linked to this is the extent to which typical academic career trajectories vary between disciplines. For
instance, in many arts and humanities subjects, academics are often employed on teaching-only
contracts prior to achieving tenure; the recent AHRC/BA Oakleigh Report on research careers in the
arts and humanities provides some useful insights on this point.309

There is also considerable variation between disciplines in terms of the relationship between expected
achievement and academic age. It is also important to consider which academics are more likely to get
involved with inter- or multidisciplinary projects, and what their associated outputs might look like.
We need to consider the sort of indicators or metrics that could be used to assist rather than obstruct
interdisciplinary working, and the kinds of equality and diversity issues that might be faced. Some
areas of research seldom make it into the top journals and this could have knock-on effects for
equality and diversity that also need to be borne in mind.

It is also worth emphasising that in some contexts, metrics can be used to support greater equality and
diversity. For example, McMaster University recently used a quantitative analysis of its pay structures
to discover the extent of gender inequality, leading to a decision to increase the annual salary of all its
female academics by C$3,500 (£1,900).310 Academic Analytics presented examples at our Sheffield
workshop of how metrics-based analysis could be used by university managers to identify promising

307 Nuffield Council on Bioethics. (2014). p.25.
308 https://www.timeshighereducation.co.uk/news/ref-is-a-misery-for-early-career-researchers-survey-finds/2019941.article;

https://charlottemathieson.wordpress.com/2015/04/24/a-culture-of-publish-or-perish-the-impact-of-the-ref-on-ecrs/.
Retrieved 28 June 2015.
309 Details of this project can be accessed at: www.ahrc.ac.uk/What-We-Do/Research-careers-and-training/Pages/Oakleigh-

Report.aspx. Retrieved 1 March 2015.
310 An example might be McMaster University’s pay uplift for women, as discussed in

www.timeshighereducation.co.uk/comment/opinion/why-mcmaster-university-gave-its-female-academics-a-payrise/2020176.article. Retrieved 1 May 2015.

93

early-career researchers, whose potential might otherwise be missed, and use this for targeted career
development.

In respect of equality and diversity concerns, several ways forward were suggested by participants at
our Sheffield workshop:



‘Baskets’ of indicators: If metrics are used, ‘baskets’ of indicators should be
developed. These should include qualitative and quantitative measures, crafted to
suit the contexts under scrutiny. In choosing a ‘diversity of metrics’, biases should be
explored and particular care taken to avoid selections that are biased in similar
directions;



Embedding equality, diversity and inclusivity: Within HEIs, equality and
diversity considerations are often linked more closely to HR rather than research;
equality and diversity should be better embedded within research (integrity),
processes and policy, which academics are more likely to understand and embrace
with ease;



Early-career researchers: Greater efforts could be made to develop metrics that
might more readily identify the contributions of early-career researchers, whether
assessing the value, quality and significance of work they’ve undertaken to date, or
to better indicate future potential success;



Weighting by age: Some asked whether metrics could be weighted by academic age
to mitigate for potential effects and biases (for example, for research income
accrued);



Involving the sector: Any decisions about the potential use of metrics should be
made with the involvement of representatives from the sector and with a keen eye on
equality and diversity concerns;



Guidance: Lessons can be learnt from REF2014, where clear equality and diversity
guidance benefited (early-career) researchers and those with complex circumstances;



Training: Training should be provided to assessors and researchers, adapted
appropriately to fit career level. This would help everyone to gain an understanding
of the equality and diversity implications involved. There is evidently a place for
organisations such as the Equality Challenge Unit and Vitae to assist with this, but
across the higher education sector, leadership and support at the highest levels is
crucial for these matters to be taken seriously.

94

Related points are made by the Australian biologist Jenny Martin in two recent blogposts on
metrics and research culture.311 Martin argues that the academic community needs to identify
and adopt alternative metrics to support equality, diversity and improved work-life balance.

7.7.

Cultures of responsibility

The various relationships between metrics, institutional strategy setting and the management of
research – and the resultant effects on academic culture and practice – are complex, but a few distinct
themes have emerged. Quantitative indicators clearly have a place in institutional performance
management and can in some cases lead to significant positive outcomes for institutions and their
staff. However, assessing performance is a very difficult and complex task, and so even where the
means of quantitative assessment are fallible, people tend to gravitate towards them, with variable
consequences for institutional strategy and for individuals. In this way, metrics can become
unhelpfully institutionalised. Administrators and employers should therefore give due attention to the
need to use them sensitively, transparently, and with the full input and co-operation of their staff.
Wherever possible, damaging effects of quantitative indicators should be identified and addressed
before use.
In considering how the use of quantitative indicators affects research behaviour, a number of distinct
patterns and trends emerge around interdisciplinarity, task reduction and the effects of metrics on
knowledge production more broadly. Policymakers and institutional managers would benefit from
more input from the scientometrics community to suggest how quantitative indicators can influence
the culture and practice of research in positive ways.
To that end, it is incumbent on research policymakers, the wider academic community, institutions,
funders and government to promote decent and fair standards of behaviour in the use of metrics.
DORA offers one set of guidelines for reducing damaging uses of JIFs in assessing individuals’
research. We set out our own framework for ‘responsible metrics’ in Chapter 10.

311 https://cubistcrystal.wordpress.com/2015/01/12/imagine-theres-new-metrics-its-easy-if-you-try/;

https://cubistcrystal.wordpress.com/2015/06/06/merit-and-demerit/. Retrieved 28 June 2015.

95

8. Sciences in transition
“ Not everything that can be counted counts, and not everything that counts can be counted.”
William Bruce Cameron312
The two previous chapters have explored the changing roles of data, indicators and performance
measures in the culture and management of HEIs. Here we want to look at how other significant
players in the research system are responding to these changes, and experimenting in various ways
with new uses of quantitative indicators. This chapter looks first at developments within the UK
Research Councils, then at research charities such as the Wellcome Trust, and the national academies.
It then turns to developments at the European level, as reflected in the European Commission’s recent
Science 2.0 White Paper. Finally, it considers how government could make greater use of quantitative
data sources to inform horizon scanning and policies for research and innovation.
This is by no means an exhaustive survey of what all research funders are doing in this arena. But it
does provide a variety of lenses through which to view developments in the UK system, and to
highlight efforts to improve indicators, data infrastructure and interoperability.

8.1.

The research funding ecosystem

UK research benefits from a variety of funding sources. The Office for National Statistics estimates
that in 2013, £28.9 billion was spent on research and development in the UK, as displayed in Figure 3
below.
UK universities benefitted from £7.6 billion of external funding for research (26% of GERD) in 2013,
including; £2.1 billion from the Research Councils, £2.3 billion from the Funding Councils, £1 billion
from UK charities, £1.2 billion from overseas sources and £300 million from business. What is often
referred to as the ‘dual support’ system for University research describes the twin routes of: i)
institutional block grants from the Funding Councils based on periodic quality assessment exercises
and ii) funding won in peer-reviewed competition from the Research Councils. Elements of the dual
support system are outlined in the box below.313

312 Cameron, W. (1963). Informal Sociology: A Casual Introduction to Sociological Thinking. Random House.
313 Taken from ‘Impact and the importance of the dual support system’ a presentation by Philip Nelson (EPSRC), given at

the HEFCE ‘REFlections 25 March 2015’ event, and redrawn. Available at
www.hefce.ac.uk/news/Events/Name,101448,en.html

96

Figure 3: Composition of UK Gross Expenditure on R&D (GERD) by funding sector, 2013314

Business

5%
9%

Government and Research
Councils
19%

46%

£28.9 Bn

Overseas
Higher Education
Private Non-Profit
organisations

21%

The dual support system
HEFCE quality-related research funding (QR) (~£1.6 billion in England 2014-15) enables:


Stability and long-term planning



Capacity building



Freedom and flexibility for universities

Rewards retrospectively
Research Council funding (~£2.6 billion in the UK 2014-15) enables:


Targeted, strategic funding



Investigator-led initiatives



Maintenance of excellence and value for money through short-term competition

Rewards prospectively

314 ONS data available at: www.ons.gov.uk/ons/dcp171778_398876.pdf. Retrieved 1 June 2015.

97

8.2.

Research Councils315

Each year, the seven UK Research Councils316 invest around £3 billion in research covering the full
spectrum of academic disciplines from the medical and biological sciences to astronomy, physics,
chemistry and engineering, social sciences, economics, environmental sciences and the arts and
humanities. The Research Councils’ shared ambition, under the banner of ‘Research Councils UK’
(RCUK), is to ensure that the UK remains the best place in the world to do research, innovate and
grow business. Research Council funding is allocated via individual grants for specific projects,
programmes and infrastructure, via the Research Councils’ own units, institutes and centres, and to
national research facilities such as the UK synchrotron, Diamond Light Source.
The Research Councils report that they are committed to strengthening the evidence base for the
assessment of research. RCUK works with other organisations to better understand the relationship
between research and the subsequent impact of that research, and to improve the quantitative and
qualitative description of research progress, productivity and quality. The Research Councils’ stated
policy on metrics is:



Metrics will always require expert review to ensure appropriate interpretation and
moderation, so metrics-based approaches should be developed within the broader
context of peer or expert review, and not as a substitute for it;



Ideally metrics should challenge assumptions made in peer review and stimulate
informed debate about research quality and impact.

In this section, we outline RCUK’s approaches to the application of metrics in research assessment,
before summarising approaches towards the collection of information on impacts.

8.2.1.

Application of metrics in research assessment

RCUK highlighted in its submission to the review317 that, as with any metrics, those based on
publication and citation data (bibliometrics) are limited in the breadth of their applicability. Research
Councils recognise the well-documented concerns about the use of bibliometrics as the basis for a

315 Particular thanks to Dr Ian Viney, MRC Director of Strategic Evaluation and Impact (and steering group member) for his

contributions to this section. RCUK also contributed to the Review’s Call for Evidence.
316 Research Councils UK (RCUK) is the strategic partnership of all seven UK Research Councils, details about the work of

RCUK and the Research Councils can be found at www.rcuk.ac.uk
317 www.rcuk.ac.uk/RCUK-prod/assets/documents/submissions/HEFCEMETRICSFINALRCUK.pdf

98

standardised approach to research assessment across all research disciplines; for instance, such issues
have been explored in detail by the ESRC and AHRC.318
ESRC has refrained from the extensive use of metrics in research assessment319, but also
acknowledges that recent advancement in metrics, particularly in certain disciplines, may have begun
to provide ways to adjust for and/or overcome these issues. AHRC recognise that there are currently
no reliable or commonly accepted metric indicators available for the majority of research outputs
from the arts and humanities.320
The Research Councils work in partnership with leading experts (such as CWTS321, ScienceMetrix322, and Evidence Ltd.323) to ensure that the bibliometrics they use for evaluation of the
outcomes of funding awards, primarily in the science, technology, engineering and medicine
disciplines, are robust and appropriate.324 Care is taken to ensure that bibliometric data is normalised
by academic field, and year, as far as is currently possible. The source of the data, and known
limitations of the normalisation and coverage are made clear in analysis. Inconsistent metrics or oversimplifications such as JIFs or h-indexes are avoided. RCUK noted that the science of this kind of
analysis is still (60 years from its inception) an emerging field, and unfortunately, is a field in which
the UK has limited established research capacity.
As noted above, RCUK also exercise care when considering the use of new metrics (such as
download statistics, analysis of social media) to avoid inconsistencies, biases, over-simplification,
lack of normalisation, and other statistical pitfalls.325 RCUK recognise that while the data from social
media provides attractive statistics, there is a lot of work to do in order to understand what
contribution this is making to accelerating translation or realising/widening impact. The extent of
participation by the academic community in these conversations, the accuracy of the data, how to

318 www.esrc.ac.uk/research/evaluation-impact/research-evaluation/bibliometrics.aspx. Retrieved 1 June 2015.
319 www.esrc.ac.uk/research/evaluation-impact/. Retrieved 1 June 2015.
320 Montgomery, L. (2013). Metrics challenges for monographs. www.knowledgeunlatched.org/2013/04/metrics-challenges-

for-monographs/. Retrieved 1 June 2015.
321 Centre for Science and Technology Studies (CWTS), Netherlands www.cwts.nl/Home
322 http://science-metrix.com
323 Now part of Thomson Reuters Ltd. http://researchanalytics.thomsonreuters.com/
324 EPSRC 2009 citations study https://www.epsrc.ac.uk/newsevents/pubs/epsrc-citations-study-2009/, Baseline bibliometric

analyses of NERC funded research 2003-2010 www.nerc.ac.uk/about/perform/evaluation/evaluationreports/citations-study2012/. Bibliometric study of India’s research output and international collaboration
www.rcuk.ac.uk/international/offices/india/landscape/bibliometric/
325 See for example the NISO White Paper on Alternative metrics which has launched a consultation on standards for

‘alternative metrics’ www.niso.org/apps/group_public/download.php/13295/niso_altmetrics_white_paper_draft_v4.pdf.
Retrieved 1 June 2015.

99

distinguish between positive and negative attention etc, are all documented challenges to using social
media as an alternative indicator of research impact.
Similarly, RCUK recognise that developments in information management technologies such as text
mining, network and cluster analysis and visualisation software, coupled with the significant increase
in the availability of digitalised data, offer opportunities for exploring and developing new metrics.
However, until any new metrics are better understood they advocate that these should be used with
care. They also state that increasing the availability of full-text, openly accessible publications, and
encouraging other research outputs to also be openly accessible will clearly increase the opportunity
to link information about funding inputs and identified researchers as contributors to particular
research outcomes.326
RCUK highlight the importance of recognising that research assessment is used for different purposes
and at different levels – it is important to be clear on the context when considering the role of metrics.
For example, the Research Councils use ex ante research assessment to allocate funding at the level of
individual projects: where the primary consideration is the quality of the proposed research. Research
Councils argue that there is no substitute for expert peer review for this assessment. Metrics as a
proxy for peer review assessment based on quality judgements are not used by Research Councils to
allocate funding. However, metrics may be used as part of the information on the previous track
record of applicants, as an input to peer review. For example, Research Councils will be exploring the
use of previously gathered output information to inform the assessment of future research
applications.
The Research Councils also undertake ex post assessment of research programmes and/or groups of
research projects according to the high-level principles set out in the Treasury ‘Green’327 and
‘Magenta’328 books. Often metrics are used within this context as an input to the evaluation. For
example, the 2012 Impact Review of the RCUK Digital Economy Programme provides a useful
framework of evidence-based metrics.329 Research Councils also use metrics (e.g. bibliometrics such

326 www.rcuk.ac.uk/research/openaccess/
327 HMT. (2011). Appraisal and Evaluation in Central Government ‘The Green Book’

https://www.gov.uk/government/uploads/system/uploads/attachment_data/file/220541/green_book_complete.pdf. Retrieved
1 June 2015.
328 HMT. (2011). Guidance for evaluation ‘The Magenta Book’.

https://www.gov.uk/government/uploads/system/uploads/attachment_data/file/220542/magenta_book_combined.pdf.
Retrieved 1 June 2015.
329 www.rcuk.ac.uk/RCUK-prod/assets/documents/documents/RCUKDEconReport.pdf. Retrieved 1 June 2015.

100

as citation impact analyses) to benchmark the research they have funded, against other research
nationally and internationally.
NERC last year evaluated the research excellence and impact of five of its Research Centres using
slightly modified REF methodology.330 The resulting REF-style excellence and impact profiles will be
one of the sources of evidence used by NERC when making strategic decisions.
The Research Councils use a range of metrics within performance monitoring and reporting, which
include aspects of research assessment. For example, Research Councils use input and output
information to report on progress against their delivery plans and strategic plans, and on a regular
basis for reporting to BIS.331 The type of information used includes: the volume of publications,
numbers of postgraduates supported, the extent of collaboration with industry, funding leveraged and
further funding attracted, patents, licenses, creative outputs and spinouts as well as large numbers of
useful case studies.332
The MRC is beginning to use bibliometric and other metrics drawn from the Researchfish system to
complement its annual assurance processes for its units, university units and institutes. Evidenced
outputs and outcomes are used to summarise achievements in a format more easily compared across
research organisations. MRC Units will be expected to re-use this information in their quinquennial
reviews. The Research Councils undertake and support studies to better understand the factors that
lead to impact, although as noted above, their view is that the UK is not internationally competitive in
this field. RCUK therefore advocate that improving the UK capacity to carry out high quality ‘science
of science policy’ research should be a shared concern across all UK funding agencies.
From a more strategic perspective, RCUK’s view is that metrics are more effective when used in
combination as individual metrics tend to give at best a very partial picture. RCUK also suggest that
the use of multiple metrics (quantitative and qualitative) with expert moderation/interpretation will
help to reduce the risk of researchers, research managers and publishers ‘gaming’ the system.

330 www.nerc.ac.uk/latest/news/nerc/centre-eval/. Retrieved 1 June 2015.
331 For instance: BIS. (2014). Trends in inputs, outputs and outcomes.

https://www.gov.uk/government/uploads/system/uploads/attachment_data/file/301473/bis-14-654-research-council-impactreports-2013-trends-in-inputs-outputs-and-outcomes_formatedit.pdf. Retrieved 1 March 2015. Also, see the following article
which notes how Research Councils are under pressure to measure themselves against metrics: Else, H. (2014). Research
councils ‘should develop metrics’ to measure success. www.timeshighereducation.co.uk/news/research-councils-shoulddevelop-metrics-to-measure-success/2012814.article. Retrieved 1 June 2015.
332 The RCUK 2014 impact report, and also individual research council impact reports can be found at

www.rcuk.ac.uk/publications/reports/rcuk-impact-report-2014/

101

RCUK has no evidence, through Researchfish, that users are trying to game the system; the main
issue is under-reporting of eligible outputs, not over-reporting, or inaccurate reporting. The re-use of
output data in research applications, publication of outputs, outcomes and impacts, as well as
streamlining reporting requirements, will support and encourage researchers in providing accurate,
consistent and complete data. If output information is used in a variety of ways – e.g. to communicate
research progress to the public and other stakeholders (including via the RCUK Gateway to
Research), to complete applications for funding (which are scrutinised by peers), and wherever
possible re-used in other repositories (e.g. Researchfish grant-paper linkages are added to Europe
PubMed Central) – then it becomes difficult to game the system.

8.2.2.

Evaluation of impact

RCUK recognise that the ‘research to impact’ process is impossible to describe using a small set of
indicators, given that it may extend over a long time period, involve many individuals, organisations,
and funding inputs, and encompass complex and varied activities. They also emphasise the message
that this process is not linear,333 and agree with concerns that there are currently few well-defined
markers of progress, with work on the ‘measurement’ of research and research impact tending to
focus on publication and citation data (particularly of journal articles) and patenting of intellectual
property, as proxies for progress, productivity and quality of research. Comprehensive and structured
information about other aspects of the research to impact process has been lacking.
One aim of the Research Councils in using the Researchfish approach is to develop improved
quantitative and qualitative information collection for other research activities such as the
establishment and maintenance of productive academic and user community collaborations, the
dissemination of results to the public and policymakers, the development of new products and
processes, and the sharing of research methods/tools and databases. Structured and comprehensive
feedback on these activities are needed to provide a more holistic picture of research. Although
metrics may be developed for some of these activities and outputs, there is a danger of oversimplification through the use of numbers, for example, counting the size of an audience for

333 Recent thinking on innovation portrays research as a ‘chain-linked’ model. “The linear perspective has been challenged

not least by modern innovation theorising and empirical research.” In the words of Kline and Rosenberg “innovation is
neither smooth nor linear, nor often well behaved.” Kline, S. and Rosenberg, N. (1986). An overview of innovation, in:
Landau, R. and Rosenberg. N. (eds.) The Positive Sum Strategy: Harnessing Technology for Economic Growth. National
Academy Press, Washington, D.C. p. 285. Their chain-linked model is an influential and widely cited focusing device for
making sense of the complex structure and diversity of patterns of the innovation process. The non-linear nature of
translation has also been emphasised in the widely used Donovan and Hanney ‘Payback Framework’ which provides a
multidimensional categorisation of benefits from research, starting with more traditional academic benefits of knowledge
production and research capacity-building, and then extending to wider benefits to society. Donovan, C. and Hanney, S.
(2011) The ‘Payback Framework’ explained, Research Evaluation. 20 (3), 181-183. DOI:
10.3152/095820211X13118583635756 http://rev.oxfordjournals.org/content/20/3/181.short

102

dissemination does not capture the extent to which the knowledge/ideas have really had an impact on
that audience.
The RCUK’s typology and approach to impact draws on the work of Martin and Tang who outlined a
series of ‘exploitation channels’ from research to economic impact, emphasising a variety of
pathways:334
A

Increasing the stock of useful knowledge

B

Training skilled graduates

C

Creating new instrumentation and methodologies

D

Forming networks and stimulating social interaction

E

Increasing the capacity for technological problem-solving

F

Creating new firms

G

Provision of social knowledge

This approach underlines the fact that reliance on just a few metrics or indicators will fail to
adequately capture the full breadth of routes to impact, and therefore miss important aspects of
eventual impact. Accordingly, a suggested high level typology of impact is as depicted in Figure 4
below.
The Research Councils have also developed and tested an approach for capturing output information
closely tied to these activities in a systematic and standardised way. Using feedback from researchers
and users, the Research Councils are gathering data to connect the steps between the research they
fund and its subsequent impacts (see Figure 5 below).
Using a common system (currently Researchfish335) RCUK gathers data across a range of outcomes
(including publications, collaborations, measures of esteem, further funding, commercialisation etc);
2014 saw the first large-scale, cross-disciplinary implementation of such an approach with researchers
providing feedback on over £16 billion of RCUK funding activity since 2006. RCUK will use the data
collected to enable the further development of metrics associated with outcomes and impacts. Some
metrics may be potential indicators of progress (e.g. technology-readiness levels for product
development, involvement in policy-setting processes), and some may be helpful to indicate the extent
of impact (wide-scale adoption of new products and interventions, or uptake of new policies).

334 Martin, B. and Tang, P. (2007) The benefits of publicly funded research. SPRU Electronic Working Paper Series no.161.

https://www.sussex.ac.uk/webteam/gateway/file.php?name=sewp161.pdf&site=25
335 www.researchfish.com

103

Figure 4: RCUK ‘Pathways to Impact’ typology diagram336

Comprehensive output information will allow modelling and hypothesis building regarding the most
effective ways to support research, and is already proving to be a rapid way of identifying relevant
case studies337 and setting these in the context of total output. As the data collected by Researchfish is
federated across all subscribing funders it is straightforward for organisations to share data for joint
analysis. At the start of 2015 the UK Researchfish dataset contained information on over £40 billion
of research investment and over 1.1 million reports of output linked to this. The majority of the
RCUK output information is made publicly available via the RCUK Gateway to Research (GtR)
within a few months of it being submitted to Research Councils, with the RCUK GtR offering a free
API for users to work with the data.

336 Available at: www.rcuk.ac.uk/RCUK-prod/assets/documents/impacts/RCUKtypologydiagram.pdf
337 For example see MRC’s 2012 report on research output at www.mrc.ac.uk/research/achievements/outputs-report/

104

Figure 5: Inputs/Outputs and Impacts (MRC, 2011)

RCUK suggest that one important area needing further development is the tracking of training and
career development. The training and movement of skilled people is one of the most impactful routes
of knowledge exchange.338 The strengths of the first phase of the US NIH/NSF STAR METRICs
project (see Section 2.6.6) was that it provided a process to capture comprehensive statistics about the
research workforce from universities, and the linkage of this data to other records. Such an approach
may not be practical in the UK, but there may be ways in which HESA data can be extended to
provide more helpful information in this area. Over the long-term the ORCID (see Section 2.5.1)
initiative will assist in the unambiguous identification of researchers and thereby the linkage of a
researcher’s output to their career record, as they move from organisation to organisation.
RCUK is supporting several pieces of work to support greater inter-operability between key systems
which will be of practical importance to the use of metrics. Two examples are:



Overview of System Interoperability Project (OSIP), supported by RCUK, Jisc
and ARMA,339 which will look at the interface between: Researchfish and university
systems, the RCUK grant management system and university systems, RCUK

338 For example see the analysis of ‘brain circulation’ presented in Elsevier. (2013).

https://www.gov.uk/government/uploads/system/uploads/attachment_data/file/263729/bis-13-1297-internationalcomparative-performance-of-the-UK-research-base-2013.pdf
339 http://orcidpilot.jiscinvolve.org/wp/files/2014/05/presentation.pptx. Retrieved 1 June 2015.

105

Gateway to Research and third party systems, and data on research students in higher
education. OSIP will also examine the main ways in which data on people, projects,
locations and other objects are uniquely identified in these systems, with a view to
recommending how this could be better managed in future;



Researchfish interoperability pilot, supported by RCUK and Researchfish. This
work aims to examine the process of exchanging publication information between
Researchfish and university systems, and the main changes that are required to make
this feasible. RCUK have recently published an update to this work pointing out that
linking grant references to research outputs is a pre-requisite for being able to
exchange data between HEIs and funder systems.340

RCUK priorities for the future341 include:



The continued development of the Researchfish approach. This will ensure that
entering data is made as simple as possible, that exchange of data with other systems
is increased, and that use of the information to support evaluation and strategy
development is maximised;



Further studies to better understand the link between research and impact in
collaboration with other funders (funding councils, charities and government), either
by commissioning new work or via strategic or response-mode funding.

8.3.

Charity funders

Given the high number and diversity of charities funding research within the UK higher education
sector,342 we do not provide an exhaustive description of systems and approaches to pre- or postaward research assessment within this report, but make some overall observations and then focus on
the Wellcome Trust in more detail as a case study example.

8.3.1.

Pre-award processes of assessment

HESA datasets, which capture details of charitable research income awarded to Higher Education
Providers (HEPs), indicate that the majority of charitable funding is allocated following an open

340 www.rcuk.ac.uk/research/researchoutcomes/future/
341 Individual research council evaluation strategies and policies can be found at www.ahrc.ac.uk/What-We-Do/Build-the-

evidence-base/Pages/Build-the-evidence-base.aspx (AHRC); www.bbsrc.ac.uk/about/policies/reviews/funded-science/
(BBSRC); https://www.epsrc.ac.uk/about/plans/evaluation/ (EPSRC); www.esrc.ac.uk/research/evaluation-impact/ (ESRC);
www.mrc.ac.uk/research/achievements/evaluation-programme/ (MRC); www.nerc.ac.uk/about/perform/evaluation/ (NERC);
www.stfc.ac.uk/files/stfc-impact-framework-evaluation-strategy/ (STFC).
342 For instance, the Association of Medical Research Charities alone involves 136 members.

106

competition process. For instance, scrutiny of HESA datasets for 2013-14 informs us that £901
million of funding was allocated through the open competition route versus £94 million of charitable
income awarded through other means.
The guidance provided by HESA on what is deemed to constitute allocation of funds through open
competition underlines the importance of peer review and/or external expert advice implemented
within rigorous processes.343
Moreover, if we look at a few of the bigger UK charities funding higher education research (see links
provided below), it is also apparent that most allocate funding primarily on the basis of peer review
and/or, to a lesser degree, tap into other forms of expert external advice.
Name of Charity

Weblink to details of pre-assessment processes

British Heart Foundation

https://www.bhf.org.uk/research/information-forresearchers/how-we-award

Cancer Research UK

www.cancerresearchuk.org/funding-for-researchers/applyingfor-funding/funding-committees
www.cancerresearchuk.org/prod_consump/groups/cr_common
/@fre/@gen/documents/generalcontent/funding-terms-ofreference.pdf

Leverhulme Trust

www.leverhulme.ac.uk/funding/choosing-a-referee.cfm

Nuffield Foundation

www.nuffieldfoundation.org/how-apply

Wellcome Trust

www.wellcome.ac.uk/Funding/Biomedicalscience/Application-information/WTD004051.htm

However, organisations within the charity sector, like government funders, have been working to
enhance their capacity to assess grants and monitor and evaluate the research and activity they
support; the challenge is to keep it simple, proportionate and palatable where donor funding is
predominantly provided to address a specific cause or medical condition. The Association of Medical
Research Charities (AMRC)344 advocates five principles of peer review to its members:
accountability, balance, independent decision making, rotation and impartiality. AMRC assesses

343 See paras 4-7 of the guidance listed at

https://www.hesa.ac.uk/index.php?option=com_studrec&task=show_file&mnl=13031&href=income_from_charities.html.
Retrieved 15 March 2015.
344 www.amrc.org.uk

107

charities’ peer review when members apply to become a member and conducts audits of all members
every five years. AMRC also makes a direct link between universities, government and funding
bodies’ use of AMRC membership as a ‘hallmark of quality’ on the basis of these processes.345

8.3.2.

Post-award processes of assessment: the Wellcome Trust’s
approach346

Approaches to research assessment post-award across charities vary and are largely determined by the
budget and skills available and adhering to the principles of proportionality. The Wellcome Trust,
currently the largest medical research charity in the UK, has developed a practical approach to postaward monitoring and evaluation which other charities have drawn upon. The Wellcome Trust
currently spends around £700 million per year on biomedical research and related activities.
Understanding the impacts of research, what works and what doesn’t, is an important requirement to
support Wellcome’s vision:

“ To improve health by supporting bright minds in science, the humanities and social
sciences, and public engagement.” 347
Since 2005, the Trust has established and evolved a set of outcomes which it would like its funding to
deliver and alongside these outcomes, a set of ‘indicators of progress’ which are used to guide
information-capture to demonstrate how far the Trust is making a difference and to build the evidence
base on the where and when the Trust’s funding is being particularly effective. Table 1 sets out the
key indicators of progress used to guide information-capture and analysis. The Trust has deliberately
used the terms ‘indicators’ and ‘progress’ to realistically represent the facts that (1) most of the
information used to demonstrate academic advancements are not objective or quantifiable proofs but
are proximate ‘measures’ at best, and (2) research and knowledge does not have defined, absolute or
‘success’ end points so progress is a more helpful concept.
However, the Wellcome Trust recognises that the major challenge in setting up frameworks to support
impact assessment is in the availability of the types of information that can be used to describe
progress (and impact); put simply, most of the data we would like to be able to bring together to
understand impact are not easily available or accessible. In the field of research assessment more
broadly, there has been a large tendency to rely on more quantitative types of information (e.g. counts

345 www.amrc.org.uk/publications/principles-peer-review provides further information on AMRC’s principles of peer

review. Retrieved 1 June 2014.
346 Particular thanks to Dr Liz Allen, Head of Evaluation at the Wellcome Trust (and steering group member) for her

contributions to this section. The Wellcome Trust also contributed to the review’s call for evidence.
347 www.wellcome.ac.uk/our-vision/

108

of publication outputs and bibliometrics) as indicators of impact rather than appreciating that the
outputs of research are broad ranging and not always easily quantified.
The Wellcome Trust has therefore evolved a pragmatic approach to monitoring and evaluating the
impacts of research it has supported by bringing together a range of information – both quantitative
and qualitative – that shows whether things are pointing in the right (or wrong) direction. It is also
exploring ways to enhance the infrastructure to support grant progress monitoring through initiatives
like FundRef, and ORCID (see Section 2.5.1 for further information: Wellcome is a founder member
of this initiative). From August 2015, all lead applicants to the Wellcome Trust will be required to
have an ORCID iD to proceed with a grant application. Wellcome is keen to use tools like ORCID to
help easily connect researchers to their research works and career status, to support easy impact and
career tracking and also to reduce researcher burdens in adding the same information across multiple
systems.
The Trust has set in place a number of systematic approaches to capturing the more ‘quantitative’ data
on:



Published research outputs directly though web-based platforms such as PubMed,
EPMC, WoS, Scopus, F1000, Impact Story and Altmetric;



Broader research outcomes and impacts, through an online grant progress reporting
platform (WT e-Val) and career choices, through a career tracking tool (Career
Tracker).348

To complement the more quantitative data on research progress which is increasingly being pulled
from source systems, the Trust also produces a set of between 30 and 50 ‘stories of impact’ (case
studies) each year. These stories, while not necessarily representative of the whole portfolio of
Wellcome Trust funding, do bring breakthroughs and progress to life and are used to support various
reviews, evaluation, stakeholder engagement and advocacy. The stories are selected by the Trust’s
scientific staff and validated by peer experts and the researchers, and the narrative is supported by
metadata (e.g. grant details; characteristics of the research/team; location; HEI) and made available as
a searchable resource.
Once a year, a digest of progress, major outputs and achievements in relation to the Trust’s outcome
goals is presented to the Board of Trustees, staff and stakeholder community. The information is also

348 www.wellcome.ac.uk/Funding/Biomedical-science/Career-tracker/index.htm

109

used to support organisation learning and dissemination of – and engagement with – the findings and
impact of Trust funded research and is published on its website.349
Table 1: Wellcome Trust Outcomes and Indicators of Progress
Outcomes (what the

Indicators of Progress

Wellcome Trust wants
to achieve)
Discoveries

The generation of significant new knowledge and understanding
Contributions to discoveries with tangible impacts on health

Applications of Research

Contributions to the development of enabling technologies, products
and devices
Uptake of research into policy and practice

Engagement

Enhanced level of informed debate on biomedical science issues
Significant engagement of key audiences in biomedical science and
increased audience reach

Research Leaders

Development of a cadre of research leaders
Evidence of significant career progression among those supported by
the Welcome Trust

Research Environment

Key contributions to the creation, development and maintenance of
major research resources
Contributions to the growth of centres of excellence

Influence

Significant impact on science funding and policy developments
Significant impact on global research priorities

349 www.wellcome.ac.uk/About-us/Publications/Reports/Biomedical-science/WTVM054494.htm

110

8.4.

National academies

This section is based on information received from the British Academy (BA)350 and Royal Society
(RS),351 both of which use peer review as the primary basis of pre-award research assessment.352
The RS makes limited use of research metrics in its work. In its publishing activities, ever since it
signed DORA, the RS has removed the JIF from its journal home pages and marketing materials, and
no longer uses them as part of its publishing strategy. As authors still frequently ask about JIFs,
however, the RS does provide them, but only as one of a number of metrics (including EigenFactor,
SCImago journal rank etc). The RS also offers article-level metrics tools (such as article downloads
and the altmetrics donut) on all its journals, and it tracks total downloads at the journal level.
In assessing and awarding grants, the RS does not use metrics as part of the grant assessment process.
Decisions to award grants are based on peer review. The RS is currently updating its guidance to
panels and, following DORA guidelines, it will ensure that committee members are aware that it does
not take account of metrics in assessment of grants. The RS does use metrics (together with
qualitative measures) to evaluate programmes and demonstrate the impact of programmes funded via
its BIS grant. This is retrospective and plays no part in the awarding of grants.
In its policy work, the RS engages in debates over the use of metrics in research assessment and how
these shape the research landscape. Examples include the Society’s involvement in the recent Nuffield
Council on Bioethics report The culture of scientific research in the UK and its engagement with
HEFCE on the design and evaluation of the REF. The report Knowledge, Networks and Nations is the
only recent RS policy study to make extensive use of bibliometrics, although they are used in other
policy contexts to demonstrate or support specific points.
The BA is also a signatory to DORA and takes no account of metrics when assessing grant
applications. It asks assessors primarily to focus on the quality of the proposed research, the ability of
the applicant(s) to carry it out successfully and the feasibility of methodology and timescale. In its
assessment processes, scores provided by assessors at the first assessment stage enable the Academy
to make an evaluation of their overall relative quality, as marginal, unfundable or fundable. This

350 Roger Kain, Vice-President of the British Academy, is a member of the review’s steering group.

www.britac.ac.uk/funding/peer-review.cfm
351 https://royalsociety.org/grants/applications/
352 The Royal Society and British Academy are taken here as illustrative of wider developments across the national

academies, and separate details have not been included on the Academy of Medical Sciences or Royal Academy of
Engineering.

111

information is useful for internal purposes, and can be used to offer feedback to Fellows and
universities on the overall quality of the applications they receive.
For the BA’s main early-career Postdoctoral Fellowships scheme, assessors are asked to consider an
applicant’s publication record, but in terms of whether the applicant has demonstrated the capacity to
make a significant contribution to their chosen field through their work to date, whether their
publication record is appropriate to their current career development stage, and whether the proposed
outputs from the Fellowship, if awarded, are appropriate. The BA does not seek to mandate what
those outputs should be, or limit consideration to academic publications.
As with the RS, the BA does use some metrics (including citations and leverage) when evaluating
programmes and demonstrating to BIS the value of BA funding, though this is retrospective and does
not influence the decision to fund.353

8.5.

European funding

For 30 years, the European Commission’s framework programmes have been providing funding to
support research and technology development across Europe. The latest multi-year framework
programme, Horizon2020 (H2020) has the ambition to provide €80 billion to research over seven
years (2014 to 2020), including €13 billion for the European Research Council (ERC). ERC funding
schemes are open to researchers of any nationality or age who wish to carry out their frontier research
in the 28 EU member states or associated countries.354 ERC funding is based on international peer
review355 with “excellence as the sole criteria”. The evaluation of Horizon2020 proposals is also
founded on principles of expert review, guided by the principles of: excellence; transparency; fairness
and impartiality; efficiency and speed; ethics; and security.356
As noted in Section 1.1, the European Commission’s ‘Science 2.0: Science in Transition’ agenda is
highly relevant to this review. 357 Carlos Moedas, Commissioner for Research, Science and
Innovation, signalled recently that his priorities in office will be “open innovation, open science and
openness to the world”, and further proposals to advance this agenda are expected in the second half

353 www.britac.ac.uk/funding/monitoring.cfm
354 http://erc.europa.eu/funding-and-grants/funding-schemes
355 http://erc.europa.eu/evaluation-panels
356 http://ec.europa.eu/research/participants/data/ref/h2020/grants_manual/pse/h2020-guide-pse_en.pdf;

http://ec.europa.eu/programmes/horizon2020/en/how-get-funding; http://ec.europa.eu/programmes/horizon2020/en/experts
357 The background document to the Science 2.0 consultation can be found at:

http://ec.europa.eu/research/consultations/science-2.0/background.pdf. Retrieved 1 June 2015.

112

of 2015.358 Responses to the Science 2.0 consultation reflect a diversity of opinions, but it appears
likely that recommendations may include calls to review quality assessment and evaluation criteria for
research proposals, with potential impacts on H2020 and beyond. 359 The consultation document also
notes that “research funding organisations may need to improve the communication of research data
from the projects that they fund by recognising those who can maximise usability and good
communication of their data.” 360
The European parliament in its oversight of funding and science policy in Europe has examined the
issue of measuring scientific performance361 and recognised the importance of good, standardised and
open information about science and technology to strengthen the European Research Area (ERA).
The EC has also recently launched a €20 million Policy Support Facility (PSF). The PSF is a new
instrument to give EU member state governments practical support to identify, implement and
evaluate those reforms needed to enhance the quality of their public funding, such as opening up
public funding to competition and introducing performance assessments of universities, or stimulating
co-operation between academia and business. It supports government officials from other countries to
peer review the effectiveness of research and innovation policies and provides access to independent
high-level expertise and analysis. The first member states to take up the services of the PSF are
Hungary and Bulgaria.362
Further relevant initiatives include the following:



UK funders such as the Research Councils note the results of studies using
international data. Bibliometrics are often used to compare research output across
nations,363 and many countries and regions have published studies to identify
strengths, gaps and opportunities in their research base.364 The World Health
Organisation is promoting efforts to combine data on global health research

358 Moedas, C. (2015) Open Innovation, Open Science, Open to the World. Speech to the ‘New ERA of Innovation’

conference, 22 June 2015 http://europa.eu/rapid/press-release_SPEECH-15-5243_en.htm Retrieved 28 June 2015.
359 There are diverse views in relation to different elements of the consultation, for instance for the potential involvement of

altmetrics. https://scienceintransition.files.wordpress.com/2014/10/draft-policy-brief-science-2-0-workshop-madrid-04december-2014.pdf. Retrieved 1 June 2015.
360 Ibid. p11.
361 Technopolis. (2014).
362 Rabesandratana, T. (2015). Bulgaria and Hungary volunteer for E.U. scrutiny of their research systems, March 2015.

Science. http://news.sciencemag.org/europe/2015/03/bulgaria-and-hungary-volunteer-e-u-scrutiny-their-research-systems.
Retrieved 1 June 2015.
363 Elsevier. (2013).
364 Science-Metrix. (2014). The UK’s performance in physics research: national and international perspectives.

www.iop.org/publications/iop/2014/file_63082.pdf. Retrieved 1 June 2015; Science-Metrix. (2013). Intra-European cooperation compared to international collaboration of the ERA countries. http://ec.europa.eu/research/innovationunion/pdf/intra-european_intern_collab.pdf#view=fit&pagemode=none. Retrieved 1 June 2015.

113

investments in a single ‘health research observatory’ which would allow analysis of
international investments in research.365 However, information on research portfolios
is rarely complete at a national level, let alone in a consistent format internationally.



Science Europe and some European member state funding agencies are exploring the
use of metrics in relation to humanities research as part of campaigns to make
humanities research more ‘visible’. Previous attempts – such as the European
Reference Index for the Humanities (ERIH)366 have highlighted how difficult it is to
establish a comprehensive database for the humanities.367



The European Science Foundation supported networking between evaluation teams
across Europe from 2007 to 2011, and the member organisation forum for the
evaluation of publicly funded research published several summaries of international
evaluation practices.368 A consistent theme was the need for a ‘common language’
for describing research progress across the European Research Area to allow
comparison, benchmarking and aggregation of research output.

8.6.

Smarter science and innovation policy

As noted above, various efforts have been made by funders and sponsors to progress more
sophisticated research assessment and management methodologies within the UK and beyond. Many
funders, including RCUK and Wellcome, are vocal advocates for greater investment in more ‘science
of science policy’ research. If this field develops, as we recommend in Chapter 10, further positive
strides will be made. In addition, we applaud many of the various efforts being made to improve data
infrastructure within the UK and beyond.
However, much more could still be done to improve transparency and openness. Too often, it is
difficult or impossible for those outside an organisation to find and understand the terms and
approaches to research assessment being employed. Moreover, there are poor levels of
interoperability across the system, as many of the funders and other organisations involved in research
assessment and management operate in silos.

365 WHO. (2013). A global health R&D observatory. WHO draft working paper, May 2013.

www.who.int/phi/documents/dwp1_global_health_rd_observatory_16May13.pdf. Retrieved 1 June.
366 www.esf.org/index.php?id=4813. Retrieved 1 June.
367 https://globalhighered.files.wordpress.com/2010/07/esf_report_final_100309.pdf. Retrieved 1 June.
368 www.esf.org/coordinating-research/mo-fora/evaluation-of-publicly-funded-research.html. Retrieved 1 June.

114

These problems extend beyond the main actors within the research system, and to the government
departments and agencies that try to shape the overall policy framework for research and for wider
aspects of the innovation system. As Stian Westlake, Director of Research and Policy at Nesta,369 has
noted: “There are plenty of intelligent people making innovation policy, both in the UK and the rest of
the world. But there is a shortage of intelligence. Too often, policymakers lack basic data...”.
For effective management of the research system, the quality of information-flows matters hugely.
But at the moment, government gets relatively little value from the enormous amount of effort that
goes into gathering information for research management and assessment, across both sides of the
dual support system.
Nesta has argued that sources of data within government bodies, such as Innovate UK’s database of
grants, or the Intellectual Property Office’s information on UK patents, are underexploited as tools for
policymaking. The same applies to information captured by HEFCE, the Research Councils, HESA
and individual HEIs.
As real-time data on the performance and impacts of the higher education and research system
increases in volume and sophistication, it can be analysed and used in new, interconnected ways.
HESA and Jisc are exploring future possibilities in this area through the Higher Education Data and
Information Improvement Programme (HEDIIP), which aims to integrate and simplify processes of
data capture, reporting and analysis.370 HESA and Jisc are also leading the development of a nextgeneration Higher Education Information Database for Institutions (HEIDI), which aims “to ease the
burden for users in higher education providers of accessing, extracting and manipulating data for
essential planning and reporting.” 371 Both HEDIIP and HEIDI are focused on the teaching side of the
higher education system, where data has in large part been managed separately from the research side,
but with discussions now underway at a policy level about the introduction of a ‘teaching excellence
framework’ (which may include its own outcome-focused metrics),372 the scope for sensitive
integration of processes across the system as a whole is likely to increase. Related scoping work on
the next generation of ‘national performance indicators’ is underway, led by HEFCE and HESA.373

369 Nesta is “an innovation charity with a mission to help people and organisations and great ideas to life”.

www.nesta.org.uk/
370 www.hediip.ac.uk
371 See www.business-intelligence.ac.uk for details of the HEIDI project.
372 https://www.timeshighereducation.co.uk/news/johnson-tef-offer-universities-financial-incentives
373 See www.hes.ac.uk/pis for details of the most recent review of national performance indicators.

115

At a national level, policies for higher education, research and the wider innovation system can be
made more robust if they are supported and informed by high quality data from within the research
system. Currently, links between ‘micro’ data and indicators, as captured by the REF, Researchfish
and Gateway to Research, and ‘macro’ policies and strategies set by HM Treasury, BIS, Research
Councils and Innovate UK are under-developed. This also applies at the international level, for
example in the uses that bodies like the OECD make of micro-level research data to inform the
measurement and benchmarking of national research and innovation systems.
Some countries are beginning to draw on scientometric mapping and analysis in more creative and
strategic ways to shape technology and innovation policies,374 to determine funding priorities and
manage portfolios,375 to measure the wider impacts of research,376 or to support wider approaches to
foresight and horizon scanning.377 In line with the wider drive to open up and derive greater value
from public sector data378, further work should be done across the UK research system to link
different datasets, so that connections, interdependencies and trade-offs between different parts of the
research system can be more readily identified and fed back into policymaking. BIS, Cabinet Office
(in terms of links to the open data agenda) and Government Office for Science (in terms of links to
Foresight and horizon scanning) are best placed to coordinate these efforts, with input from HEFCE,
HESA, Jisc, Research Councils, Innovate UK and HEIs. These broader opportunities to connect
research data to policy should also form part of the remit of a new Forum for Responsible Metrics
(see Chapter 10).

374 Rotolo, D., Rafols, I., Hopkins, M. and Leydesdorff, L. (2014) Scientometric Mapping as a Strategic Intelligence Tool for

the Governance of Emerging Technologies. SPRU Working Paper Series 2014-10.
375 Wallace, M. L. and Rafols, S. (2015). ‘Research Portfolio Analysis in Science Policy: Moving from Financial Returns to

Societal Benefits’. Minerva. Vol. 53, Issue 2, pp. 89-115.
376 Small Advanced Economies Initiative (2014) Broadening the Scope of Impact: Defining, assessing and measuring impact

of major public research programmes, with lessons from 6 small advanced economies. SAEI.
www.smalladvancedeconomies.org/wp-content/uploads/SAEI_Impact-Framework_Feb_2015_Issue2.pdf Retrieved 1 July
2015.
377 Ciarli, T., Coad, A and Rafols, I. (2013) Quantitative Analysis of Technology Futures. Part 1: Techniques, Context, and

Organizations. Nesta Working Paper No. 13/08.
378 See e.g. HM Government (2012) Open Data White Paper: Unleashing the Potential. Cabinet Office/HM Stationery

Office. June 2012.

116

9. Reflections on REF
“ I tell American colleagues bemused by the UK’s dual-support system of research
funding that, for all the gripes, it is better than the US system, where stateuniversity professors must hustle for grants to meet even basic academic needs. If
we want to retain dual support in a larger and more diverse university system, a
mechanism such as the Research Excellence Framework is a necessary evil.”
Martin Rees379
While the terms of reference for this review (Section 1.1) are to consider the use of quantitative
information for research assessment broadly, the role of metrics in future national-scale research
assessments, such as the REF, was an important part of our deliberations. Much of the evidence that
the panel received, both in response to our written call for evidence and at the workshops that we
organised, has been concerned with the potential benefits and challenges associated with increased
use of quantitative data in the REF. In this chapter, we consider this evidence, together with the
outcomes of the literature review (Supplementary Report I) and analysis of REF2014 outcomes
(Supplementary Report II), and draw conclusions that the four UK higher education Funding Bodies
should consider as they develop future national assessment exercises. The findings in this chapter will
also be of interest outside the UK, where more or less quantitative approaches to national research
assessment are already being used, or being considered.380
The REF fulfils a number of policy objectives. The exercise provides both information about research
quality that is used by the UK HE Funding Bodies to distribute funding for research, and
accountability for public research investment. The research quality assessments also provide valuable
information that allows institutions to benchmark their performance against others in the UK. And
this, in turn, allows the identification of strengths and weaknesses that provide both incentives for
improvement and the information needed to target actions to achieve that improvement. Not all the
written evidence about the REF we received acknowledged the diversity of purposes of the REF, and
there are clearly differences of opinion about the relative importance of the purposes. It is not
surprising, therefore, that there are equally different views on how and whether quantitative indicators
of research quality should feature in the assessment.
The UK has a 30-year history of research assessment, and there is good and varied evidence that the
overall quality of UK research has improved over that period. While it is not possible to ascribe any

379 Rees, M. (2015). The importance – and limits – of the Haldane Principle. Research Fortnight, 24 June 2015.
380 Please see Chapter 2 for a discussion of the international landscape.

117

causal link, it is the case that research assessment has strongly shaped the environment within which
quality has improved.
While research assessment in general, and the REF in particular, bring benefits, this is not without
cost. A recurring theme in much of the evidence we received was the burden, both perceived and
actual, of the REF and opportunity costs associated with the exercise. For many who argued in favour
of increased use of metrics and indicators in future assessments, the reduction in burden was seen as
the major reason, perhaps the sole reason, for pursuing this approach. Many of these advocates for
metrics appeared to consider their use as essentially cost-free, a point we will return to later in the
chapter.
It is also the case that there is evidence that the opportunities to gather quantitative data about research
are increasing. As set out in the literature review (Supplementary Report I), and Chapter 3, the
repertoire of metrics that can be attached to research outputs is increasing. As well as a growing suite
of bibliometric indicators, the range of disciplines to which those indicators can be applied is also
rising. Bookmarking services like Academia.edu, Mendeley and ResearchGate offer the prospect of
the earlier prediction of papers that will become highly cited, and the measurement of social media
sharing, and other online mentions of research, raises the possibility of quantitative data that provides
some evidence for the impact of research beyond its value in academia.
At its heart, the REF is a process built on expert and peer review. While peer review is used across the
global research system, and is widely accepted as the ‘gold standard’ of assessment, it is not without
its problems and challenges. These are discussed in Chapter 5 of this report (and the literature review,
Supplementary Report I), and include numerous ways in which peer review may be biased, leading to
outcomes that are related to factors other than the merit of the object reviewed. The scope of this
review does not extend to a detailed critique of the use of peer review. However, we note that in
considering the replacement or augmentation of peer review with approaches based on the use of
quantitative data and indicators, we also need to acknowledge that peer review itself may not always
deliver an accurate outcome.
The submissions made to our call for evidence were largely sceptical about the enhanced (and in some
cases, current) use of metrics for research assessment. The majority suggested that peer review should
remain central to the process. However, there was some support for the additional use of quantitative

118

data in the REF. This was primarily raised as a potential means by which the burden of the exercise
could be reduced.381
It was also suggested that quantitative data could be used alongside peer review to enhance, and
perhaps simplify, the assessment process:

“ There are many new (and old) sources of data that will be valuable in providing
quantitative and qualitative evidence in supporting evaluative and resource
allocation decisions associated with research assessment.”
PLOS response382
A significant concern for many respondents to our call for evidence was the potential that some types
of quantitative data could encourage particular behaviours that were not necessarily positive.
Examples ranged from the use of ‘citation clubs’ to boost citations, to major distortions in the research
endeavour, downplaying whole disciplinary areas.
This chapter will summarise and synthesise the evidence we have reviewed that is pertinent to
consideration of future iterations of the REF. In this discussion we have opted to follow the structure
of the REF2014, considering the use of quantitative data in the assessment of research outputs, impact
and environment in turn. In Chapter 10 of this report, where we make a series of recommendations,
we will discuss whether the use of quantitative data could support a national research assessment
process with a radically different structure.

9.1.

Quantitative data and the assessment of research
outputs

9.1.1.

Guidance and process for outputs in REF2014

The assessment of research outputs formed a significant part of REF2014. This element of the REF
accounted for 65% of the overall assessment, and submitting institutions were required to include up
to four outputs listed against each member of staff entered in the exercise. There were few limits
imposed on the nature of research outputs that could be submitted to the REF.383

381 www.hefce.ac.uk/rsrch/REFreview/feedback/
382 All responses can be downloaded from

www.hefce.ac.uk/media/hefce,2014/content/research/research,metrics/responses_to_metrics_review_call_for_evidence.pdf
383 REF2014: Assessment framework and guidance on submissions, p23, para 118 www.ref.ac.uk/pubs/2011-02/

119

Provisions were made for staff with individual staff circumstances who, depending on the nature of
their circumstances, had the option to provide fewer than four outputs. Circumstances include earlycareer researchers, staff who had taken career breaks (including maternity or paternity leave), and
staff with illnesses or disabilities.384
There were also provisions for the submission of double-weighted outputs where a case could be
made that the output was of considerable ‘scale and scope’.385 The sub-panels were required to judge
whether these criteria were met, and for each double-weighted output a reserve could also be
submitted. The reserve was assessed when the sub-panel did not accept the argument for double
weighting.
Outputs were assessed by expert review carried out by sub-panel members. Outputs were assessed
against criteria for originality, rigour and significance, with the interpretation of these criteria being
carried out in a disciplinary context by sub-panels.
Following the bibliometrics pilot carried out in 2008-09,386 REF sub-panels were permitted to use
citation data to inform their peer review judgements. Citation data were sourced centrally by the REF
team from the Scopus database. Citation data were only provided for journal articles and conference
proceedings that were available in the database, and raw citation counts for each output were
provided, together with contextual information to aid the interpretation of the data.387
General guidance on how citation data were to be used for REF2014 was as follows:388



The number of times that an output was cited was provided as additional information
about the academic significance of submitted outputs. However, assessors were
advised to continue relying on expert review as the primary means of assessing
outputs, in order to reach rounded judgements about the full range of assessment
criteria (‘originality, significance and rigour’);

384 Ibid. paras 64-91.
385 Ibid. para 123.
386 Details of the past pilot exercise can be found at www.ref.ac.uk/about/background/bibliometrics/
387 Sub-panel 11 Computer Science and Informatics, had originally indicated that in addition to the Scopus citation data

provided by the REF team, this sub-panel intended to make use of Google Scholar as a further source of citation information.
However, this did not transpire as it was not possible to agree a suitable process for bulk access to their citation information
due to Google Scholar’s arrangements with publishers.
388 Ibid. However, more detailed specific guidance was also provided at the panel level as well. Guidance for Main Panel A,

B and C was provided at www.ref.ac.uk/pubs/2012-01/#d.en.69569. It should be noted that citation data was only utilised in
some Main Panel A, B and C units of assessment, and not at all in Main Panel D.

120



They were advised to also recognise the significance of outputs beyond academia
wherever appropriate, and assess all outputs on an equal basis, regardless of whether
or not citation data is available for them;



In using citation data, panels were asked to recognise the limited value of citation
data for recently published outputs, the variable citation patterns for different fields
of research, the possibility of ‘negative citations’, and the limitations of such data for
outputs in languages other than English;



The sub-panels also received discipline-specific contextual information about
citation rates for each year of the assessment period to inform, if appropriate, the
interpretation of citation data;



Panels were also instructed to have due regard to the potential equality implications
of using citation data as additional information, and were referred to Analysis of data
from the pilot exercise to develop bibliometric indicators for the REF: The effect of
using normalised citation scores for particular staff characteristics;389



Sub-panels were explicitly instructed not to refer to any additional sources of
bibliometric analysis, such as JIFs, or other journal-level metrics in their
assessments.

9.1.2.

Assessment of outputs REF2014 in practice

Over 190,000 outputs were submitted for assessment in REF2014. As in previous exercises the range
of outputs submitted was diverse, although the majority were identified as journal articles (80%),
books (8%) or book chapters (7%). A significant number (2,254) of double-weighted outputs were
submitted, the majority, but by no means all, of which were books that were submitted to UOAs in
arts and humanities disciplines.
In all sub-panels outputs were allocated to members for assessment with generally at least two
members assessing each output. Outputs were scored on a five-point scale,390 with a discussion
between panel members, and sometimes the whole sub-panel, used where necessary to agree a

389 HEFCE 2011/03. Analysis of data from the pilot exercise to develop bibliometric indicators for the REF. The effect of

using normalised citation scores for particular staff characteristics. www.hefce.ac.uk/pubs/year/2011/201103/. Retrieved 1
June 2015.
390 In addition to 4-star ratings, outputs could also be graded ‘unclassified’, defined as “Quality that falls below the standard

of nationally recognised work. Or work which does not meet the published definition of research for the purposes of this
assessment”, see www.ref.ac.uk/panels/assessmentcriteriaandleveldefinitions. Retrieved 1 June 2015.

121

consensus score. Citation data was requested by 11 of the 36 sub-panels, mostly in the life- and
physical-science areas, as listed in the annex of tables (Table 6).
The outcome of the assessment reflected the generally strong performance of the UK research base,
and the highly selective nature of the outputs submitted to the exercise. Of the outputs submitted 22%
were assessed to be of 4-star quality (world-leading) with a further 50% assessed as 3-star
(internationally excellent). This represents an increase compared to the 2008 RAE, and REF-team
analysis has shown that the increase is similar to the increasing volume of UK highly-cited journal
articles over the same period.391 However, an alternative analytical approach, using a different source
of citation data, has produced results that suggest some difference in the relationship between citation
measures and grade boundaries across the exercises (Jonathan Grant, personal communication).
Similar comparisons were also made in the panel overview reports; for example Sub-panel 7 (earth
and environmental sciences) commented:

“ The overall assessment of the quality of research within the UOA 7 submissions is
consistent with recent metrics analysis showing the high international standing of
UK Environmental Sciences (see: ‘International Comparative Performance of the
UK Research Base – 2013: A report prepared by Elsevier for the UK’s Department
of Business, Innovation and Skills (BIS)’). This study shows that UK Environmental
Sciences has the highest field-weighted citation impact of all the sub-disciplines
considered, and that it has strengthened significantly between 2008 and 2012.” 392
In their overview reports those sub-panels that used citation data reported that the data was useful in
informing peer review judgements, although Main Panel B (physical sciences and engineering)
reported variability in the quality and usefulness of citation data. The one sub-panel under Main Panel
C that used citation data (18: economics and econometrics) reported that the data had informed
‘marginal judgements’, but that few scores had been influenced.

391 www.ref.ac.uk/pubs/refmanagersreport/
392 REF2014: Overview report by Main Panel B and Sub-panels 7 to 15.

www.ref.ac.uk/media/ref/content/expanel/member/Main%20Panel%20B%20overview%20report.pdf, para 10. Retrieved 1
June 2015.

122

The use of citation data in marginal judgements or to resolve disagreement appears to have been
commonplace. In the Main Panel A overview report it states that:

“ Citation data were only used where these provided a positive indicator of academic
uptake (typically if there was any disagreement between those assessing the
output).” 393
In our discussions with members from sub-panels that had used citation data, this point was
repeatedly emphasised. While the citation data was useful, we heard that it was used in borderline
cases and so had had a limited impact on overall scoring patterns. It was also clear that members of
sub-panels that had used citation data were aware of, and had taken into account, the data limitations.
In particular, the importance of time since publication in interpreting citation numbers, and the
possibility of articles that are considered to contain errors being highly cited were discussed in the
focus groups.
Our discussions with members of sub-panels that did not opt to use citation data focused on the
limitations of citation-based metrics in research assessment, with a general feeling that these
limitations were likely to be material for at least the medium term and possibly longer. The limitations
reflected those discussed in the literature review (Supplementary Report I), but the (lack of) utility for
many disciplines or types of research was emphasised (see also Chapter 4). For example, it was
pointed out that citation may not be a useful proxy for quality in more applied research in disciplines
like engineering, or for whole fields of study:

“ What would [bibliometrics’] use be for poetry, drama, and how would they be
useful where the key output is the book, or where academics for a particular subject
published through a range of different output types?”
Concerns about the impact of extensive use of citation data on under-represented groups and earlycareer researchers were also raised repeatedly, and the potential negative behavioural consequences if
the focus of assessment was on a small number of specific metrics was mentioned as a concern.

9.1.3.

Further evidence on the assessment of outputs

The literature review that we commissioned (Supplementary Report I) summarises the scholarly
literature on the use of bibliometric indicators in contexts including national research assessments

393 REF2014: Overview report by Main Panel A and Sub-panels 1 to 6.

www.ref.ac.uk/media/ref/content/expanel/member/Main%20Panel%20A%20overview%20report.pdf, para 39. Retrieved 1
June 2015.

123

systems. The general conclusions from the literature can be summarised as follows and are also
discussed in Section 3.
Firstly, the disciplinary coverage of citation databases and the diversity of publication practices mean
that bibliometric indicators cannot be considered to be equally applicable across all disciplines.
Secondly, there are significant limitations of bibliometric indicators that have implications for their
use in national research assessment systems. Thirdly, the choice of indicators may have behavioural
consequences on institutions or researchers, at least some of which are not aligned with policy
objectives. Fourthly, while there are correlations between metrics and peer review-based assessments,
they vary by indicator, by field and by level of aggregation (see Chapter 5). Some fields show strong
correlations, but many fields have moderate to weak correlations between metrics and peer ratings. In
particular, the evidence suggests that the power of bibliometric indicators to predict the outcomes of
peer review (and vice versa) is rather limited. Fifthly, the existence of strong correlations is a
necessary but not a sufficient condition to replace peer review by bibliometric indicators, since the
role of national research assessments does not limit itself to the distribution of research funds. The
literature review (in Section 3) also examined the potential of new ‘alternative metrics’ for the
assessment of outputs and concluded that they did not appear to add any additional information for the
assessment of outputs, and can also be susceptible to biases, gaming and difficulties of interpretation.
The biases of bibliometric indicators and the risk of promoting undesirable behaviours featured
prominently in the evidence that we received both in response to our call for written evidence, and in
contributions at the workshops we held, as discussed elsewhere in this report.
We considered in detail the issue of the consistency of peer review and quantitative indicators as
applied to research outputs, and also commissioned analysis from HEFCE of the REF2014 outcomes
(see Supplementary Report II). Evidence from the scholarly literature on this point (Supplementary
Report I, Section 2.2) suggests that peer review judgements and quantitative indicators correlate, but
only weakly. A similar conclusion emerges from the bibliometrics pilot that HEFCE conducted in
2009, which tested a number of options for the use of bibliometric indicators.
Based on her analysis of psychology and physics departments, Dorothy Bishop argued at our Sussex
workshop in favour of using the departmental h-index as an alternative to peer review evaluation for
the allocation of research funding.394 This work seems to demonstrate a high correlation between the
department h-index and UK research funding allocations, at least for the discipline of psychology.
More recently, the utility of the departmental h-index as a predictor of the outcomes of REF2014 has

394 Bishop discusses this further in a blog post: http://deevybee.blogspot.co.uk/2013/01/an-alternative-to-ref2014.html

124

been tested for a range of disciplines.395 This work concluded that these h-indices do indeed correlate
with REF outcomes, but the relationship is not strong enough to justify the use of the departmental hindex as a replacement for peer review.
All the studies examining the relationship between bibliometric indicators and the outcomes of peer
review in the RAE and REF have been carried out at the level of the scores given to whole
submissions to the exercise, grouping together outputs from, typically, a university department. In our
more detailed analysis (see Supplementary Report II), we asked HEFCE to examine the relationship
between a suite of bibliometric and other indicators and peer review scoring at the level of individual
outputs.
The HEFCE analysis considered the coverage, correlation and predictive qualities of 15 metrics to
REF2014 output scores across all units of assessment. This analysis used anonymised REF scores at
the output-by-author level and linked these to a selection of bibliometric and altmetric indicators. This
approach differs from other analyses, such as that recently undertaken by Elsevier, which tend to
compare REF scores with metrics at more aggregated levels.396 In our view, HEFCE’s analysis is
superior to Elsevier’s, as looking very closely at output-level scores and metrics allows for a more
robust judgement to be made about any correlative link between the REF peer review process and
various metrics at the level of the individual research contribution.
Coverage of the outputs by the metrics used was generally poor for units of assessment in Main
Panels C and D, while those UOAs in Main Panels A and B had over 90% coverage. This meant that
the findings from the analysis were more applicable to Main Panels A and B, however UOAs in the
other panel groups were included in the analysis and significant findings reported.
The initial analysis considered metrics as possible predictive indicators of outputs achieving a 4-star
score. Generally, this found that correlation between the metric indicator and those achieving 4-star
was low (less than 0.5), indicating that individual metrics do not provide a like-for-like replacement
for REF peer review. However, this varied by UOA and the analysis indicated that the following
UOAs had relatively good correlation with some of the associated metrics: clinical medicine;
biological sciences; chemistry; physics; economics and econometrics. For all metrics, except mentions
on Twitter, correlations were much weaker for articles published more recently.

395 For predictions see Mryglod et al. (2014) Scientometrics 102, pp 2165-2180 (available at http://arxiv.org/abs/1411.1996.

Retrieved 9 March 2015; also http://arxiv.org/pdf/1501.07857v1.pdf. Retrieved 9 March 2015.
396 Details of the Elsevier analysis can be found here: https://www.timeshighereducation.co.uk/can-the-research-excellence-

framework-ref-run-on-metrics

125

The relative relationships between the metrics, achieving 4-star in REF and additional characteristics
were considered using regression models. The additional characteristics considered were year of
publication, unit of assessment or main panel, early-career researcher status and sex of author. The
modelling helped identify those metrics most influential in explaining the variation in achieving the
4-star threshold. This identified Scopus full text clicks, number of authors, number of times cited on
Google Scholar, SJR, source normalised impact per paper, tweets and Science Direct downloads as
influential in predicting REF score.
The addition of output and author characteristics showed that there was a significant year-ofpublication effect. Of those with low metrics scores, more recent publications were more likely to get
a 4-star rating; this could be because the metrics have not had time to reach their final magnitude or
have not yet been calculated. Papers submitted by early-career researchers in Main Panel C were
significantly less likely to achieve a 4-star rating than those by non-early-career researchers with the
same metrics ratings. Female authors in Main Panel B were significantly less likely to achieve a 4-star
rating than male authors with the same metrics ratings.

9.2.

Quantitative data and the assessment of impact

9.2.1.

Guidance and process for impact in REF2014

The assessment of the economic and societal impact of research was a new element added to the UK’s
national research assessment for the first time in REF2014, and accounted for 20% of the overall
quality profile. Following considerable debate, and an extensive pilot exercise carried out in 2010,397
the impact element of REF2014 consisted of two components:398



Assessment of information on how impact is supported (the ‘impact template’);



Assessment of case studies describing impact.

For the purposes of the REF, a broad definition of impact was adopted, and panels made their
assessments on the basis of two criteria: reach and significance. As with the assessment of outputs, the
sub-panels themselves provided a discipline-specific interpretation of both the definition and
assessment criteria. The impact assessment was made by a process of expert review, with users of
research from outside of academia playing an important role. In contrast with the assessment of

397 Details of HEFCE’s REF pilot impact exercise are available at:

www.ref.ac.uk/pubs/refimpactpilotexercisefindingsoftheexpertpanels/. Retrieved 1 June 2015.
398 Decisions relating to assessing research impact are available at: www.ref.ac.uk/pubs/2011-01/. Retrieved 1 June 2015.

126

outputs, no systematic gathering or use of quantitative data on impact was carried out to support the
assessment.

9.2.2.

Assessment of impact in REF2014

There were 6,975 case studies and 1,911 impact templates submitted for assessment in REF2014.
Overall, the sub-panels identified a significant proportion of research impact to be 4-star (44%) or 3star (40%), although there was variation in the quality assessment across submissions. In their
overview reports, main panels and sub-panel reflected positively, on the scale, breadth and quality of
impact assessed, and on the process of the assessment.
Because of its novelty, HEFCE and the other UK HE Funding Bodies commissioned RAND Europe
to undertake detailed evaluations of the impact element.399 These examined both the costs and benefits
to HEIs of preparing for the impact element and the experiences of panel members of the assessment.
The impact element also featured significantly in the feedback that HEIs provided directly to
HEFCE400 and was also discussed by Technopolis in their report on the administrative burden of the
REF.401 Synthesising these sources of evidence we conclude as follows. For HEIs, preparing for the
impact element brought benefits in terms of better understanding their impact, and providing strategic
insight into the maximal delivery of impact from research. There were, however, concerns raised
about the burden of preparing the submission, and the cost of this part of the exercise alone is
estimated to be £55 million across the whole sector.402 As with the REF more broadly it was
suggested by some that increased use of quantitative indicators or metrics could reduce this burden.
The feedback from panel members on the process of assessment is also positive, although a number of
potential points for improvement for future assessments were noted.403
A common theme in both the experience of HEIs in preparing submissions to the impact element, and
the experience of panel members in the assessment, were the challenges of evidencing impact. These
concerns were related to specific types of impact, or concerned with the timescales over which impact
occurred. For panel members, in particular, there were challenges in making assessments of
corroborating evidence, especially where this was qualitative in nature.

399 Manville, C., Morgan Jones, M, Frearson, M., Castle-Clarke, S., Henham, M., Gunashekar, S. and Grant, J. (2015);

Manville, C., Guthrie, S., Henham, M., Garrod, B., Sousa, S., Kirtley, A., Castle-Clark, S. and Ling, T. (2015).
400 www.hefce.ac.uk/rsrch/REFreview/feedback/
401 Technopolis, REF Accountability Review: Costs, benefits and burden. (Forthcoming, 2015).
402 Manville, C., Morgan Jones, M et al. (2015). xvi.
403 Manville, C., Guthrie, S. et al. (2015).

127

9.2.3.

Further evidence on the assessment of impact

Compared to bibliometrics, where their use for the analysis of the academic impact of journal articles
has a long history, the use of quantitative data for the assessment of broader impact is a newer
phenomenon (see Chapter 3). A number of metrics have been proposed for the assessment of impact,
including those related to patents (and their citations) and other documentation relating to intellectual
property rights, social media dissemination and discussion, or weblinks and traffic. All of these
indicators are in an early stage of development, and have not been extensively analysed or validated
(see discussion in the literature review (Supplementary Report I), section 3). It also the case that most,
if not all, of the quantitative indicators proposed are highly specific to particular types of research
impact. For example, while patent numbers or citations may be relevant for some impacts that arise
from research commercialisation, they are of no value in measuring policy impact.
In the Australian ERA, some quantitative measures of broader impact are assessed, namely patents,
plant breeders’ rights, registered designs and research commercialisation income. We heard evidence
that there are concerns with this approach, related to the implied narrow definition of societal impact
and the potential that focusing on a small number of metrics might significantly skew behaviour.404
Despite the challenges, in response to our call for evidence some expressed a hope that more
quantitative data might help with the assessment of impact. It was also suggested that analysis for the
case studies submitted to REF2014:

“ might present a picture of whether there are in fact a set of metrics which could be
applied to impact; nevertheless whether these could be collected in a way which is
any less time consuming than preparing a case study it is clearly too early to say.”
University of Hertfordshire response
As noted in Chapter 3, a recent study undertaken by King’s College London and Digital Science
indicates that this is not currently feasible. However, more work could be done to identify quantitative
data or indicators that could be used as supporting evidence for specific types of impact.

404 Donovan, C. (2011). State of the Art in Assessing Research Impact: Introduction to a special issue. Research Evaluation.

3: 175-179; Presentation to the review steering group available at
www.hefce.ac.uk/media/hefce/content/What,we,do/Research/How,we,fund,research/Metrics/Donovan%20HEFCE%2027%2
0May%202014.pdf

128

9.3.

Quantitative data and the assessment of research
environment

9.3.1.

Guidance and process for environment in REF2014

The third element of REF2014 is the assessment of the research environment, which accounts for 15%
of the overall assessment. This element is based on a combination of narrative and quantitative
information, the former supplied by the HEIs and the latter extracted from data collected by HESA.405
Three items of quantitative data were collected for all UOAs:



Research doctoral degrees awarded;



Research income;



Research income in-kind.

These measures were linked to submitted units by HEIs, and reflected the activity of the whole unit,
not just those staff who were entered into the REF.
Sub-panels assessed the environment element by a process of expert review, against the criteria of
vitality and sustainability, with a discipline-specific interpretation of these criteria being provided by
the sub-panels themselves.

9.3.2.

Assessment of environment in REF2014 in practice

Based on the panel overview reports, and on the feedback collected from panel members by HEFCE,
we conclude that, in terms of the provision of quantitative date, environment was the least successful
element of REF2014. The element is an improvement on the equivalent component of the RAE, with
panel members being positive about the more structured approach, and HEIs welcoming the use of
data that were already collected. However, panel members expressed concerns that the narrative
elements were hard to assess, with difficulties in separating quality in research environment from
quality in writing about it. There were also issues with the quantitative data, which panels found
difficult to interpret without knowing the overall scale of the unit under assessment, or how the data

405 www.ref.ac.uk/subguide/ref4environmentdata/

129

related to the staff selected for submission. For example, Main Panel C commented in their overview
report that:

“ The sub-panels found that these data could not be used in any sort of mechanistic
fashion, since they [...] relate to all the staff in a given unit, rather than relating
only to those staff submitted.” 406
Similar concerns were raised by other sub-panels.
In our discussions with REF panel members it was often suggested that the assessment of research
environment would benefit from extended use of appropriate, and appropriately contextualised,
quantitative data. Indeed this is the only aspect of the REF where we encountered general enthusiasm
for a strongly quantitative approach. In contrast, this area of the REF received little mention in our
call for evidence, and was not discussed at the workshops we convened.

9.4.

Cost of metrics-based research assessment

As discussed earlier, a significant driver for those in favour of increased use of metrics was the
potential to reduce the cost and burden of the national research assessment. This assertion is based on
an assumption that a metrics-based exercise would indeed cost less. The collection of quantitative data
and its processing to produce metrics and indicators is not itself cost free, so it is important to
accompany any consideration of the increased use of quantitative data with a robust estimate of the
associated costs.
If quantitative data are already collected, readily available and do not require significant further
validation or checking then the cost of their use will be low. However, experience from REF2014
suggests this is not always the case, even with relatively straightforward data sources. For example,
HEIs report that considerable effort was required to validate, and sometimes correct both citation data
and HESA statistics used in REF2014. We also note the commentary in the review of the costs of the
REF407 that the use of a citation data in REF2014 encouraged HEIs to use this information in their
preparations for the exercise, which resulted in additional costs locally. Furthermore, as set out in
Chapter 3, considerable challenges remain due to the nature of the data infrastructure.
It is also important to remember that some costs of assessment are related to the structure, rather than
the mechanism of assessment. For example, significant costs to HEIs are associated with selecting

406 REF2014: Overview report by Main Panel C and Sub-panels 16 to 26

www.ref.ac.uk/media/ref/content/expanel/member/Main%20Panel%20C%20overview%20report.pdf, para 116.
407 Technopolis. (2015).

130

staff or outputs to be submitted for assessment.408 If these features remain, the reduction in cost that
resulted in using bibliometrics to assess outputs might be rather modest.

9.5.

Conclusions

9.5.1.

Research outputs in the REF

On the basis of the evidence we have considered, we conclude that it is not currently feasible to assess
the quality of research outputs using quantitative indicators alone.
For published scholarly work, there are some robust data sources that can be used to derive
‘indicators’, though caution needs to be exercised when considering all disciplines via existing
bibliographic databases. Nevertheless, citations of a published output – in some form or another –
remain a useful indicator of knowledge production, use and re-use – among the academic community
at the very least. While there has been some improvement in the disciplinary coverage of citation
databases (e.g. WoS; Scopus) since HEFCE’s previous work on this issue,409 at this time the coverage
of many arts and humanities fields remains limited. Additionally, where the published research output
is not a peer-reviewed journal article, the ability to systematically capture bibliographic data on the
outputs and any data on use and re-use among the academic or other community is more limited –
though there are indications that some of the larger information providers are exploring this space.
For these reasons of coverage and for limitations in the conclusions that can be made alone via
citation and use and re-use metrics, those nations that use quantitative indicators in their national
research assessments generally adopt a dual approach and use peer review for disciplines outside of
the natural sciences; this is the case with the Australian and Italian systems, discussed in Chapter 2.
Other issues with the use of quantitative indicators to assess research outputs include concerns over
gender bias in citation practices and resultant effects on equality and diversity. Even if these technical
problems of coverage and bias can be overcome, we are not convinced that the quantitative indicators
currently available, even including new ‘alternative metrics’, could be used, alone, as a robust
indicator of quality across all disciplines. No set of numbers, however broad, is likely to be able to
capture the multifaceted and nuanced judgements on the quality of research outputs that the REF
process currently provides.

408 Ibid.
409 www.ref.ac.uk/about/background/bibliometrics/

131

Notwithstanding these challenges, we also conclude that more quantitative data – particularly around
published outputs (both scholarly and other) – do continue to have a place in complementing
expert/peer review judgements of research quality, excellence and impact. This approach has been
used relatively successfully in REF2014, and we recommend that it be continued and enhanced in
future exercises.

9.5.2.

Research impact in the REF

On the basis of the evidence considered, we have concluded that it is not feasible to assess the quality
of research impact using quantitative indicators alone.
The impact case studies are necessarily narrative and describe a range of self-selected impacts
associated with HEI submissions. Research impact in the REF is broadly defined and we believe this
is the right approach. On the other hand, quantitative data and indicators are highly specific to the
types of impact concerned. We are keen that impact does not become narrow and specifically defined.
For an exercise such as the REF where HEIs are effectively competing for funds, narrowly defining
impact is likely to constrain thinking around which impact case studies should be submitted, and
certain types of research are therefore likely to gain greater currency than others. Moreover, as
described in early chapters, we should avoid creating perverse incentives within the research
ecosystem. It is also the case that quantitative data about impact will need to be seen in context, and
providing that context is likely to continue to require a narrative element.
Nevertheless, we conclude that there is considerable potential to enhance and streamline the use of
quantitative data as supporting evidence within a narrative case-study-based approach to impact
assessment; more quantitative data can help to illustrate magnitude and specifics and help bring
impacts to life. We recommend that the UK HE Funding Bodies build on the analysis of the impact
case studies from REF2014 to develop a set of guidelines on the use of quantitative evidence of
impact. While not being prescriptive, these guidelines should provide suggested data to evidence
specific types of impact and should also include standards for the collection of metadata to ensure the
characteristics of the research being described by the submitting HEIs are captured systematically.

9.5.3.

Research environment in the REF

We advocate the need and value of structured and consistent ‘input’ data for each submission to the
REF. We also conclude that there is scope for enhancing the use of quantitative data for the
assessment of the research environment, but that these data need to be provided with sufficient
context to enable their interpretation. As a minimum this needs to include information on the total size
of the unit to which the data refers, and in some cases the collection of data specifically relating to
staff submitted to the exercise may be preferable, albeit more costly.

132

We also emphasise the enormous potential value of building the research information infrastructure to
support REF in the future. If HEIs were to establish a platform of research identifiers for all their
researchers (and researchers could be encouraged to link their career path and research works to these
identifiers through various systems) then it would be easier to draw data together and reduce the
burden on researchers in future REF exercises when delivering their submissions. Further, unique
identifiers for research inputs, outputs and other entities such as organisations, and the ability to
semantically link these to researchers, would enable more robust assessment and analysis.

133

10. Responsible metrics
“ We need new metrics…To move forward, we need to challenge the current norms; define
merit much more broadly; measure qualities we value in people but which are hard to
measure...This way we can bequeath new models of success and leadership to the next
generation to help fix the problems we have inherited from the past.”
Jenny Martin410
Over the past five years, there has been an increasingly sophisticated debate in the UK, across Europe
and internationally about the governance of research and innovation – and the need for better evidence
and intelligence to underpin policies in this area. The concept of ‘responsible research and innovation’
(RRI) has gained currency as a framework for research governance within the European Commission,
UK Research Councils,411 and research funders in the Netherlands, Germany, the US and Japan. At its
simplest, RRI can be defined as “taking care of the future through collective stewardship of science
and innovation in the present”. It brings to research policy a focus on questions of anticipation,
reflexivity, deliberation, inclusiveness and responsiveness.412 But we also need robust evidence to
underpin this shift and to validate expert opinion.
Drawing on discussions over RRI, we propose the notion of responsible metrics as a way of framing
appropriate uses of quantitative indicators in the governance, management and assessment of
research. The notion of responsible metrics distils the essence of other important contributions to
these debates, including the Leiden Manifesto and DORA. Responsible metrics can be understood in
terms of a number of dimensions:



Robustness: basing metrics on the best possible data in terms of accuracy and scope;



Humility: recognising that quantitative evaluation should support – but not supplant
– qualitative, expert assessment;



Transparency: keeping data collection and analytical processes open and
transparent, so that those being evaluated can test and verify the results;

410 Martin, J. (2015). Merit and demerit. Blogpost, 6 June 2015. https://cubistcrystal.wordpress.com/2015/01/12/imagine-

theres-new-metrics-its-easy-if-you-try/. Retrieved 20 June 2015.
411 Such as EPSRC; see https://www.epsrc.ac.uk/research/framework/. Retrieved 1 June 2015.
412 Stilgoe, J., Owen, R. and Macnaghten, P. (2013). Developing a framework for responsible innovation. Research Policy.

42, 1568-1580; Valdivia, W. and Guston, D. (2015). Responsible innovation: a primer for policymakers, Centre for
Technology Innovation, Brookings Institution, May 2015. www.brookings.edu/research/papers/2015/05/05-responsibleinnovation-valdivia-guston. Retrieved 1 June 2015.

134



Diversity: accounting for variation by field, and using a range of indicators to reflect
and support a plurality of research and researcher career paths across the system;



Reflexivity: recognising and anticipating the systemic and potential effects of
indicators, and updating them in response.

As stated in the Leiden Manifesto,413 “research metrics can provide crucial information that would be
difficult to gather or understand by means of individual expertise. But this quantitative information
must not be allowed to morph from an instrument into the goal.”
Everyone can agree that one of the primary aims of research policy at all levels should be to
recognise, promote and nurture ‘excellence’. The promise of metrics is that they can make the
identification of research excellence more straightforward and more objective – and cheaper and
easier to administer. When one designs a metric for research excellence, one also implicitly constructs
a definition of excellence, and locks that definition in place. But excellence in research is
multidimensional and, crucially, it changes over time. Within this multidimensionality, there are
elements that relate to the advancement of knowledge, and elements that relate to benefits beyond the
academy (‘impact’). The relationship between these is complex. Research that delivers impact doesn’t
necessarily always advance fundamental knowledge, but evidence from REF2014 does suggest that,
by-and-large, they are inextricably intertwined.
Because of this, we need to think very clearly about what we are assessing, and select methods and
metrics appropriate to our needs. As new research fields develop, definitions of what constitutes
excellent research evolve. Interdisciplinary and multidisciplinary research creates new kinds of
excellence that don’t necessarily correspond to the definitions appropriate for the component
disciplines from which new fields emerge.
Scientometric data are fairly well developed, and can be used to indicate knowledge progression and
use and re-use among academic audiences (particularly in the sciences/biosciences but increasingly
across different disciplines). However the danger of thoughtless over-reliance on metrics to evaluate
research quality is that they can lock in place backward-looking definitions of what constitutes
research excellence. A focus on responsible metrics is designed to avoid these pitfalls and ensure that
quantitative indicators are used in appropriate, ethical ways.

413 www.leidenmanifesto.org

135

10.1.


Headline findings

There are powerful currents whipping up the metric tide. These include: growing
pressures for audit and evaluation of public spending on higher education and research;
demands by policymakers for more strategic intelligence on research quality and impact;
the need for institutions to manage and develop their strategies for research; competition
within and between institutions for prestige, students, staff and resources; and increases in
the availability of real-time ‘big data’ on research uptake. Consequently the number and
range of tools to identify, analyse and assess research information is increasing. This is a
fast moving area, but many approaches are still in the early stages of development and
will take time to mature. There is a danger in rushing to over-interpret the available data.



Across the research community, the description, production and consumption of
metrics remains contested and open to misunderstandings. In a positive sense, wider
use of quantitative indicators, and the emergence of alternative metrics for societal
impact, form part of the transition to a more open, accountable and outward-facing
research system. But this has been accompanied by a backlash against the inappropriate
weight being placed on particular indicators – such as JIFs – within the research system,
as reflected by DORA, which now has over 570 organisational and 12,300 individual
signatories.414 Responses to this review reflect this division of opinion. The majority of
those who submitted evidence, or engaged with the review in other ways, are sceptical
about any moves to increase the role of metrics in research management. However, a
significant minority are enthusiastic about metrics, particularly if appropriate care is
exercised in their design and application, and data infrastructure can be improved.



There is significant interest in online platforms and tools that can enhance access to
and visibility of research including Twitter, Facebook, blogs and sector-specific sites
like Academia.edu, Mendeley, and ResearchGate. Evidence on whether and how these
may relate to research quality is very limited. But over time, they might be developed to
provide indicators of research progression and impact, or act as early pointers towards
indicators more closely correlated with quality, such as citations.



Peer review, despite its flaws and limitations, continues to command widespread
support across disciplines. Metrics should support, not supplant, expert judgement. Peer
review is not perfect, but it is the least worst form of academic governance we have, and
should continue to be the primary basis for assessing research papers, proposals and

414 www.ascb.org/dora. As of July 2015, only three UK universities are DORA signatories: the Universities of Manchester,

Sussex and UCL.

136

individuals, and for national assessments like the REF. However, carefully selected and
applied quantitative indicators can be a useful complement to other forms of decisionmaking.



One size is unlikely to fit all: a mature research system needs a variable geometry of
expert judgement, quantitative and qualitative measures. Research assessment needs
to be undertaken with due regard for research diversity: the nature of research varies, as
does its domain (by discipline and context) and the form of its outputs – from academic
papers in journals, through single and jointly authored books, to performances and
practices. We need greater clarity as to which indicators are most useful – or not – for
specific disciplines and contexts, and why. The assessment of academic quality is highly
context-specific, and it is sensible to think in terms of research qualities, rather than
striving for a single definition or measure of quality.



Indicators can only meet their potential if they are underpinned by an open,
transparent and coherent data infrastructure. How underlying data are collected and
processed – and the extent to which they remain open to interrogation – is crucial. If we
want agreed, standardised indicators, we need to develop and promote: unique,
unambiguous, persistent, verified, open, global identifiers; agreed standard data formats;
and agreed standard data semantics. Without this holy trinity of identifiers, standards and
semantics, we risk developing metrics that are not robust, trustworthy or properly
understood.



Common data standards are needed to support interoperability. The reliable
identification and effective authentication of information is a prerequisite for producing
and maintaining trustworthy metrics. The different systems operated by HEIs, funders
and publishers need to interoperate and to import and exchange data more efficiently and
effectively; also definitions of research-related concepts need to be harmonised across the
systems. An obvious example is the overlap between HEI institutional uses of CRISs for
research management and RCUK’s requirement that researchers use Researchfish for
reporting, which is creating a need for the same information to be entered twice, into
different systems.



There are growing opportunities for sharing data across platforms. The drive for
transparency in all aspects of research and associated activities, including metrics, has
increased the pressures for data-sharing and interoperability. Fundamental information
about funding inputs remains fragmented, despite the improvements brought by RCUK’s
Gateway to Research, and initiatives such as Europe PubMed grant lookup, and even
commercial efforts such as UberResearch’s Dimensions system. It is not possible to
easily generate a UK view of public and charitable funding in many areas. As described

137

in Chapter 2, the development and uptake of unique identifiers associated with
individuals and their research works (e.g. ORCID and DOIs) will present the research
community with an opportunity to connect existing and future information about research
as never before, improving the robustness of metrics, and reducing administrative burden.



Inappropriate indicators create perverse incentives. Across the community, there is
legitimate concern that some of the quantitative indicators already being used to support
decisions around research excellence and quality can be gamed and can lead to
unintended consequences. The worst example of this is the widespread use of JIFs, where
group (journal-level) metrics are ascribed to its non-homogenous constituents (articles) as
a proxy for quality. There is also a very real possibility of existing or emergent indicators
being gamed (for example through ‘citation clubs’, salami-slicing of papers to increase
citation counts, and battles over author positioning). These consequences need to be
identified, acknowledged and addressed.



There is a need for greater transparency in the construction and use of indicators.
Actors within research assessment and management systems should behave responsibly,
considering and pre-empting negative consequences wherever possible, for instance in
relation to considerations of researcher equality and diversity, and the use of league tables
in institutional management. The development of more transparent processes and open
data systems should help to improve the situation and reduce the potential for abusive
practices.



At present, further use of quantitative indicators in research assessment and
management cannot be relied on to reduce costs or administrative burden. Unless
existing processes (such as peer review) are reduced when additional metrics are added,
there will inevitably be an overall increase in burden. However, as the underlying data
infrastructure is improved and metrics become more robust and trusted by the
community, it is likely that the additional burden of collecting and assessing metrics
could be outweighed by the reduction of peer review effort in some areas – and indeed by
other uses for the data.



Our correlation analysis of the REF2014 results at output-by-author level
(Supplementary Report II) has shown that individual metrics give significantly
different outcomes from the REF peer review process, and therefore cannot provide
a like-for-like replacement for REF peer review. Publication year was a significant
factor in the calculation of correlation with REF scores, with all but two metrics showing
significant decreases in correlation for more recent outputs. There is large variation in the
coverage of metrics across the REF submission, with particular issues with coverage in
units of assessment (UOAs) in REF Main Panel D (mainly arts & humanities). There is

138

also evidence to suggest statistically significant differences in the correlation with REF
scores for early-career researchers and women in a small number of UOAs.



Within the REF, it is not currently feasible to assess the quality of UOAs using
quantitative indicators alone. In REF2014, while some indicators (citation counts, and
supporting text to highlight significance or quality in other ways) were supplied to some
panels to help inform their judgements, caution needs to be exercised when considering
all disciplines with existing bibliographic databases. Even if technical problems of
coverage and bias can be overcome, no set of numbers, however broad, is likely to be
able to capture the multifaceted and nuanced judgements on the quality of research
outputs that the REF process currently provides.



Similarly, for the impact component of the REF, it is not currently feasible to use
quantitative indicators in place of narrative impact case studies, or the impact
template. There is a danger that the concept of impact might narrow and become too
specifically defined by the ready availability of indicators for some types of impact and
not for others. For an exercise like the REF, where HEIs are effectively competing for
funds, defining impact by indicators is likely to constrain thinking around which impact
stories have greatest currency and should be submitted, potentially limiting the overall
diversity of the UK’s research base.



For the environment component of the REF, there is scope to enhance the use of
quantitative indicators in the next assessment cycle, provided they are used with
sufficient context to enable their interpretation.



There is a need for more research on research. The study of research systems –
sometimes called the ‘science of science policy’ – is poorly funded in the UK. The
evidence base to address the questions that we have been exploring throughout this
review is very limited; however the questions being asked of funders and HEIs – ‘What
should we fund?’ How best should we fund?’ ‘Who should we hire/promote/invest in?’ –
are far from new. BIS has commissioned work in this area,415 mainly focused on
innovation and economic impact, and the MRC’s ‘research impact’ initiative has
committed £1 million to seven studies now under way to better understand the link
between publicly funded research and economic/societal impact.416 But more funding is

415 See: BIS (2014). BIS research strategy 2014/15.

https://www.gov.uk/government/uploads/system/uploads/attachment_data/file/357021/BIS_14_1065_BIS_Research_Strateg
y_2014-2015.pdf
416 www.mrc.ac.uk/funding/how-we-fund-research/highlight-notices/economic-impact-highlight-notice/. Retrieved 1 June

2015.

139

needed as part of a coordinated UK effort to improve the evidence base in this area.
Connected to this, there is potential for the scientometrics community to more actively
communicate how quantitative indicators are used.

140

Three scenarios for the next REF
For the next REF cycle (currently expected to conclude in 2020), the review considered three ways in
which greater use of quantitative data could enable national assessments on a different basis to
REF2014 (these are also illustrated in Figure 6):

 Option A: incremental addition of quantitative data. This would involve retaining the
basic structural framework and peer-review-based approach of REF2014, with the
additional use of quantitative data to inform peer review judgements. We analyse the
potential for this option in Chapter 9, and recommend that it be explored. Over time, the
incremental addition of more quantitative information to the assessment is likely to enrich
the exercise; in the longer term, as the quality and quantity of reliable quantitative data
increase, it leaves open more radical options such as Option C below.

 Option B: metrics only. Here the present system would be replaced by one based wholly
on a set of quantitative metrics. There could be flexibility on how these measures were
combined and weighted to deliver an overall ‘score’, so that the present tripartite structure
of the REF would no longer be needed. This type of approach is in use in Australia and
Italy, for example, although in both cases it is not linked directly to funding allocations and
is used only for the natural sciences, with other disciplines still assessed by peer review.
Our assessment of the evidence leads us to conclude that this approach is not sufficiently
robust, defensible or desirable. Many sources of quantitative data have issues of coverage
and bias, and there are significant behavioural implications that would result from a focus
on a set of quantitative indicators – particularly where there is a link to research funding.
There are also limits to the availability of quantitative indicators for the assessment of the
broader impacts of research, which were captured for the first time in REF2014. Losing the
impact element of the REF would be a retrograde step that should be avoided.

 Option C: interim or sampled evaluations. An alternative might be to conduct interim
assessments using quantitative data more often (perhaps annually) with full peer-reviewbased assessments occurring less frequently (perhaps every ten years). A similar idea would
be to assess a representative sample of research outputs, without the wide coverage
achieved by the REF. Both options would have the advantage of reducing costs and
administrative burden. The aim here would be to identify changes in research performance,
rather than measuring absolute performance levels, which would be reserved for the full
peer-review-based exercises. However, the same concerns over coverage and bias would
apply as in Option B, and it is questionable whether this approach would command
sufficient confidence to support adjustments in funding. Given the limited ability at this
stage of quantitative indicators to predict peer review outcomes (cf. Supplementary Reports
I and II), it is possible that any changes reflected in interim or sampled assessments would
be related to the differences in assessment approach rather than underlying research quality.
As a result, we cannot recommend this approach.
141

Figure 6: Options for the greater use of quantitative data in national assessments

10.2. Recommendations
This review has identified a number of specific recommendations for further work and action on the
part of key actors in the UK research system. These draw on the evidence we have gathered, and
should be seen as part of broader attempts to strengthen research governance, management and
assessment which have been gathering momentum, and where the UK is well positioned to play a
leading role internationally. We have grouped the recommendations under a number of thematic
headings, as follows:



Supporting the effective leadership, governance and management of research
cultures;



Improving the data infrastructure that supports research information management79;



Increasing the usefulness of existing data and information sources;



Using metrics in the next REF;



Coordinating activity and building evidence.

142

At the end of each recommendation, we list the people, organisations and roles that we see as being
best placed to act upon it. In all cases, we hope that these recommendations can be adopted and taken
forward in the spirit of positive and constructive engagement that has underpinned this review.
Supporting the effective leadership, governance and management of research
cultures
1

The research community should develop a more sophisticated and nuanced approach to the
contribution and limitations of quantitative indicators. Greater care with language and
terminology is needed. The term ‘metrics’ is often unhelpful; the preferred term ‘indicators’
reflects a recognition that data may lack specific relevance, even if they are useful overall. (HEIs,
funders, managers, researchers)

2

At an institutional level, HEI leaders should develop a clear statement of principles on their
approach to research management and assessment, including the role of quantitative
indicators. On the basis of these principles, they should carefully select quantitative indicators
that are appropriate to their institutional context. Where institutions are making use of league
tables and ranking measures, they should explain why they are using these as a means to achieve
particular ends. Where possible, alternative indicators that support equality and diversity should
be identified and included. Clear communication of the rationale for selecting particular
indicators, and how they will be used as a management tool, is paramount. As part of this process,
HEIs should consider signing up to DORA, or drawing on its principles and tailoring them to their
institutional contexts. (Heads of institutions, heads of research, HEI governors)

3

Research managers and administrators should champion these principles and the use of
responsible metrics within their institutions. They should pay due attention to the equality and
diversity implications of research assessment choices; engage with external experts such as those
at the Equality Challenge Unit; help to facilitate a more open and transparent data infrastructure;
advocate the use of unique identifiers such as ORCID iDs; work with funders and publishers on
data interoperability; explore indicators for aspects of research that they wish to assess rather than
using existing indicators because they are readily available; advise senior leaders on metrics that
are meaningful for their institutional or departmental context; and exchange best practice through
sector bodies such as ARMA. (Managers, research administrators, ARMA)

4

HR managers and recruitment or promotion panels in HEIs should be explicit about the
criteria used for academic appointment and promotion decisions. These criteria should be
founded in expert judgement and may reflect both the academic quality of outputs and wider
contributions to policy, industry or society. Judgements may sometimes usefully be guided by
metrics, if they are relevant to the criteria in question and used responsibly; article-level citation
metrics, for instance, might be useful indicators of academic impact, as long as they are

143

interpreted in the light of disciplinary norms and with due regard to their limitations. Journal-level
metrics, such as the JIF, should not be used. (HR managers, recruitment and promotion panels,
UUK)
5

Individual researchers should be mindful of the limitations of particular indicators in the
way they present their own CVs and evaluate the work of colleagues. When standard indicators
are inadequate, individual researchers should look for a range of data sources to document and
support claims about the impact of their work. (All researchers)

6

Like HEIs, research funders should develop their own context-specific principles for the use
of quantitative indicators in research assessment and management and ensure that these are
well communicated, and easy to locate and understand. They should pursue approaches to data
collection that are transparent, accessible, and allow for greater interoperability across a diversity
of platforms. (UK HE Funding Bodies, Research Councils, other research funders)

7

Data providers, analysts and producers of university rankings and league tables should
strive for greater transparency and interoperability between different measurement
systems. Some, such as Times Higher Education, have taken commendable steps to be more open
about their choice of indicators and the weightings given to these, but other rankings remain
opaque and ‘black-boxed’. (Data providers, analysts and producers of university rankings and
league tables)

8

Publishers should reduce emphasis on journal impact factors as a promotional tool, and
only use them in the context of a variety of journal-based metrics that provide a richer view
of performance. As suggested by DORA, this broader indicator set could include 5-year impact
factor, EigenFactor, SCImago, editorial and publication times. Publishers, with the aid of
Committee on Publication Ethics (COPE), should encourage responsible authorship practices and
the provision of more detailed information about the specific contributions of each author.
Publishers should also make available a range of article-level metrics to encourage a shift toward
assessment based on the academic quality of an article rather than JIFs. (Publishers)

Improving the data infrastructure that supports research information
management
9

There is a need for greater transparency and openness in research data infrastructure. A set
of principles should be developed for technologies, practices and cultures that can support
open, trustworthy research information management. These principles should be adopted by
funders, data providers, administrators and researchers as a foundation for further work. (UK HE
Funding Bodies, RCUK, Jisc, data providers, managers, administrators)

144

10 The UK research system should take full advantage of ORCID as its preferred system of
unique identifiers. ORCID iDs should be mandatory for all researchers in the next REF.
Funders and HEIs should utilise ORCID for grant applications, management and reporting
platforms, and the benefits of ORCID need to be better communicated to researchers. (HEIs, UK
HE Funding Bodies, funders, managers, UUK, HESA)
11 Identifiers are also needed for institutions, and the most likely candidate for a global
solution is the ISNI, which already has good coverage of publishers, funders and research
organisations. The use of ISNIs should therefore be extended to cover all institutions referenced
in future REF submissions, and used more widely in internal HEI- and funder-management
processes. One component of the solution will be to map the various organisational identifier
systems against ISNI to allow the various existing systems to interoperate. (UK HE Funding
Bodies, HEIs, funders, publishers, UUK, HESA)
12 Publishers should mandate ORCIDs and ISNIs and funder grant references for article
submission, and retain this metadata throughout the publication lifecycle. This will facilitate
exchange of information on research activity, and help deliver data and metrics at minimal burden
to researchers and administrators. (Publishers and data providers)
13 The use of DOIs should be extended to cover all research outputs. This should include all
outputs submitted to a future REF for which DOIs are suitable, and DOIs should also be more
widely adopted in internal HEI and research funder processes. DOIs already predominate in the
journal publishing sphere – they should be extended to cover other outputs where no identifier
system exists, such as book chapters and datasets. (UK HE Funding Bodies, HEIs, funders, UUK)
14 Further investment in research information infrastructure is required. Funders and Jisc
should explore opportunities for additional strategic investments, particularly to improve the
interoperability of research management systems. (HMT, BIS, RCUK, UK HE Funding Bodies,
Jisc, ARMA)
Increasing the usefulness of existing data and information sources
15 HEFCE, funders, HEIs and Jisc should explore how to leverage data held in existing
platforms to support the REF process, and vice versa. Further debate is also required about the
merits of local collection within HEIs and data collection at the national level. (HEFCE, RCUK,
HEIs, Jisc, HESA, ARMA)
16 BIS should identify ways of linking data gathered from research-related platforms
(including Gateway to Research, Researchfish and the REF) more directly to policy
processes in BIS and other departments, especially around foresight, horizon scanning and
research prioritisation. (BIS, other government departments, UK HE Funding Bodies, RCUK)

145

Using metrics in the next REF
17 For the next REF cycle, we make some specific recommendations to HEFCE and the other UK
HE Funding Bodies, as follows. (UK HE Funding Bodies)
a. In assessing outputs, we recommend that quantitative data – particularly around
published outputs – continue to have a place in informing peer review judgements of
research quality. This approach has been used successfully in REF2014, and we
recommend that it be continued and enhanced in future exercises.
b. In assessing impact, we recommend that HEFCE and the UK HE Funding Bodies
build on the analysis of the impact case studies from REF2014 to develop clear
guidelines for the use of quantitative indicators in future impact case studies. While
not being prescriptive, these guidelines should provide suggested data to evidence
specific types of impact. They should include standards for the collection of metadata to
ensure the characteristics of the research being described are captured systematically; for
example, by using consistent monetary units.
c. In assessing the research environment, we recommend that there is scope for
enhancing the use of quantitative data, but that these data need to be provided with
sufficient context to enable their interpretation. At a minimum this needs to include
information on the total size of the unit to which the data refer. In some cases, the
collection of data specifically relating to staff submitted to the exercise may be preferable,
albeit more costly. In addition, data on the structure and use of digital information
systems to support research (or research and teaching) may be crucial to further develop
excellent research environments.
Coordinating activity and building evidence
18 The UK research community needs a mechanism to carry forward the agenda set out in this
report. We propose the establishment of a Forum for Responsible Metrics, which would
bring together research funders, HEIs and their representative bodies, publishers, data
providers and others to work on issues of data standards, interoperability, openness and
transparency. UK HE Funding Bodies, UUK and Jisc should coordinate this forum, drawing in
support and expertise from other funders and sector bodies as appropriate. The forum should have
preparations for the future REF within its remit, but should also look more broadly at the use of
metrics in HEI management and by other funders. This forum might also seek to coordinate UK
responses to the many initiatives in this area across Europe and internationally – and those that

146

may yet emerge – around research metrics, standards and data infrastructure.417 It can ensure that
the UK system stays ahead of the curve and continues to make real progress on this issue,
supporting research in the most intelligent and coordinated way, influencing debates in Europe
and the standards that other countries will eventually follow. (UK HE Funding Bodies, UUK, Jisc,
ARMA)
19 Research funders need to increase investment in the science of science policy. There is a need
for greater research and innovation in this area, to develop and apply insights from computing,
statistics, social science and economics to better understand the relationship between research, its
qualities and wider impacts. (Research funders)
20 One positive aspect of this review has been the debate it has generated. As a legacy initiative,
the steering group is setting up a blog (www.ResponsibleMetrics.org) as a forum for ongoing
discussion of the issues raised by this report. The site will celebrate responsible practices, but
also name and shame bad practices when they occur. Researchers will be encouraged to send in
examples of good or bad design, or application of metrics and indicators across the research
system. Adapting the approach taken by the Literary Review’s “Bad Sex in Fiction” award, every
year we will award a “Bad Metric” prize to the most egregious example of an inappropriate use of
quantitative indicators in research management. (Review steering group)

417

For example, www.niso.org/topics/tl/altmetrics_initiative/

147

Annex of tables
Chapter 1
Table 1: Independent Metrics Review Workshops
Topic, host and

Roundtable with

In Metrics We Trust?

date

London-based HEIs

Prospects and pitfalls of

UCL, 15 July 2014

new research metrics.

Metrics for All?

REF panel focus groups

University of Sheffield,

Royal Academy of

2 December 2014

University of Sussex, 7

Arts and Humanities

Roundtable with

workshop

Scottish-based HEIs

Engineering, 28

University of

Scottish Funding

November 2014

Warwick, 16 January

Council, Edinburgh,

2015

30 March 2015

October 2014
Description

Participants

A broad range of

Focused on equality and

Five hour-long focus

The three aims of the

Participants drawn

discussed a range of

speakers introduced and

diversity related issues,

groups were held with

workshop were to (1)

from across the

issues including:

encouraged debate on

with themed sessions, as

academics involved with

Offer a clear overview

Scottish HE system

some of the key issues

follows: (1) Metrics of

the REF process as

of the progress to date

discussed a range of

pertinent to the project.

success: how to ensure

follows:

in the development of

issues relevant to the

The workshop was

metrics support early-

metrics of relevance to

review

organised into three

career researchers? (2)

thematic plenary panels:

Metrics and bias: how to

(1) The changing

ensure that metrics

landscape for research

support gender equality?

metrics; (2) The darker

(3) Metrics for all? How

Developments in

side of metrics; (3)

to ensure that metrics

metrics;

Towards responsible

support the broader

uses of metrics.

diversity agenda in

The purpose of
research
assessment;
Variations between
elements of
assessment and
disciplines;

Enabling new

approaches in future A ‘metrics bazaar’ also
REF exercises;

research.

The key aim of the focus
groups was to seek
feedback on the
(potential) use of metrics
within the REF2014
process, and future
research assessment
exercises. Questions
probed on the (potential)
use of metrics in relation

provided attendees with

to the assessment of: (1)
148

arts and humanities to
date and persisting
challenges; (2)
Explore the potential
benefits and
drawbacks of metrics
use in research
assessment and
management from the
perspective of

Consequences of

an interactive

Outputs; (2) Environment; disciplines within the

metrics use;

opportunity to explore

and (3) Impact. Groups

arts and humanities;

metric tools and

were facilitated by

(3) Generate evidence,

platforms with

members of the Steering

insights and concrete

providers.

Group. Chatham House

recommendations that

rules were employed to

can inform the final

encourage honest and full

report of the

discussion.

independent metrics

Using metrics for
assessment of
research impact.

review.
Audience

Web link

c.40 pro-vice

Over 150 delegates

45 people attended this

Focus Group 1: reps from

50 people attended this

Representatives from

chancellors, deans

attended the event

event including

sub-panels under Main

event including

Scottish-based HEIs

and departments

including members of

representatives from the

Panel (MP) A; Focus

representatives from

and organisations

heads from across

the metrics review

academic community,

Group 2: reps from sub-

the academic

London HEIs

panel, researchers,

learned societies,

panels under MP B; Focus community, learned

university managers,

research offices, sector

Group 3: reps from sub-

metrics developers and

bodies, equality and

panels under MP C; Focus offices, sector bodies,

providers and a range of

diversity offices, sector

Group 4: reps from sub-

sector press, publishers

stakeholders from the

press and data providers.

panels under MP D;

and data providers.

www.hefce.ac.uk/media/he
fce/content/What,we,do/Re
search/How,we,fund,resear
ch/Metrics/Paper%2018%2
014%20Summary%20of%2
0UCL%20roundtable.pdf

research and higher

Focus Group 5: reps from

education community.

all MPs

www.hefce.ac.uk/news/Events/N
ame,101079,en.html

www.hefce.ac.uk/news/Events/N
ame,101078,en.html

149

No link available

societies, research

www.hefce.ac.uk/news/Events/
Name,101073,en.html

No link available

Table 2: Sector consultation/engagement activities
Date

Event

Location

12 May 2014

Scientometrics workshop

Paris

9-11 June 2014

ARMA Conference

Blackpool

26 June 2014

Roundtable with Minister for Universities and Science

London

15 August 2014

Roundtable at Melbourne University

Melbourne

10-13 August 2014

National Council of University Research Administrators (NCURA) (USA)

Washington DC

25-26 September 2014

Wellcome Trust altmetrics conference

London

3-5 September 2014

Science and Information Technology meeting

Leiden

8-9 September 2014

Higher Education Institutional Research Conference

Oxford

9-10 September 2014

Vitae Researcher Development International Conference

Manchester

18-22 October 2014

Society of Research Administrators International (SRA) 47th Annual Meeting

San Diego

30 October 2014

Russell Group meeting

London

30 October 2014

HEPI dinner

London

6 November 2014

Science 2.0 – Science in Transition event

London

14 November 2014

SpotOn London event

London

21 November 2014

UKSG 2014 Forum

London

21 November 2014

British Sociological Association event

London

26 January 2015

Vitae Every Researcher Counts conference

London

2 February 2015

Heads of Chemistry UK, REF2014 Review Meeting

London
150

Date

Event

Location

23-24 February 2015

Middle East and North Africa (MENA) Summit

Doha

9 March 2015

The Political Studies Association and British International Studies Association REF meeting

London

10 March 2015

Humanities and Social Sciences Learned Societies and Subject Associations Network Meeting

London

25 March 2015

HEFCE REFlections conference

London

30 March 2015

UKSG conference

Glasgow

31 March 2015

HEPI-Elsevier Annual Research Conference ‘Reflections on REF2014 – Where Next?’

London

23 April 2015

Westminster Higher Education Forum on ‘The Future of the REF’

London

6 May 2015

‘In Metrics We Trust? Impact, indicators and the prospect for social sciences’ Oxford Impact seminar series

Oxford

18-19 May 2015

ORCID-CASRAI joint conference

Barcelona

1-3 June 2015

ARMA conference

Brighton

7 June 2015

Consortium of Humanities Centers and Institutes annual meeting

Madison

10 June 2015

‘Approaches to Facilitating Research Impact’, Oxford Impact seminar series

Oxford

11 June 2015

IREG Forum on university performance

Aalborg

22-23 June 2015

European Commission conference on ‘A new start for Europe: opening up to an ERA of innovation’

Brussels

24 June 2015

Thomson Reuters 3rd Annual Research Symposium

Tokyo

28 June-1 July 2015

EARMA conference: Global Outreach: Enabling Cultures and Diversity in Research Management and

Leiden

Administration

151

Chapter 3
Table 3: Summary of alternative indicators
Object

Indicator

Impact type

Evidence of value

Possible to

Method of collection for large

spam?

sets

Academics

Academic website followers

Scholarly

Correlations with h-index

Yes

Manual

Articles, papers

Downloads or views

Scholarly

Correlations with

Yes

From publishers? or sites such as

citations
Books

Books

Books

Google Books Citations

Scholarly; educational;

Correlations with

cultural

citations

Library holdings =

Scholarly; educational;

Correlations with

Libcitations

cultural

citations

Reviews

Scholarly; public

Academia.edu or ResearchGate
Yes?

Automatic collection via API

No?

Automatic collection via API

Correlations with

Yes (web); No

Automatic from web, manual from

citations

(mag.)

magazines?

Data-sets

Web of Science citations

Scholarly or public

None

No

From Web of Science in the future

Images

Views, copies, tags

Scholarly; educational;

None

Yes

Automatic collection via API in

cultural

some cases, TinEye/Google image
searches

All pubs.

All pubs.

Blog citations

Downloads or views in social

Scholarly; educational;

Correlations with

public

citations

Scholarly

websites

152

Yes

Commercial altmetric provider

Yes

Manual or from site owner?

All pubs.

All pubs.

Forum citations

Google Scholar citations

Scholarly; educational.;

Weak associations with

public

citations

Scholarly

Correlations with Web of

Yes

Commercial altmetric provider

Yes

Publish or Perish software for

Science and Scopus

individual cases; manual

citations
All pubs.

Mendeley bookmarks

Scholarly; educational?

Correlations with

Yes

Automatic collection via API

citations
All pubs.

Other bookmarks

Scholarly; educational?

All pubs.

Patents (Google patent search)

Commercial

All pubs.

Tweets

Mainly scholarly

Manual

Very weak association

No

Manual

Yes

Buy from altmetrics providers;

with citations
All pubs.

Web or URL citations

Educational, scholarly

Correlations with

limited free API access
Yes

Automatic collection via Bing API

Yes

Automatic collection via Bing API

Yes?

Automatic collection via Bing API

citations
All pubs.

Web presentation mentions

Educational, scholarly

Correlations with
citations

All pubs.

Web syllabus mentions

Educational

Correlations with
citations

Software

Web of Science citations

Scholarly

None

Videos

Views, comments, sentiment

Scholarly; educational;

None

cultural

Web of Science
Yes

Automatic collection via API in
some cases

153

Chapter 4

12

6

25

10249

14

15

10
11

1

16
6

9086
8582

4
4

3

8

3884

7

22
1
1
36
112

5200
4688
6376
6731
5551

4
2
18
17
1898

12

2

9

4101

24

2

3
9
17

3982
1348
8539

28
16
90

10

3
7

2

1
14
1
46
32

4
2
3

Working
paper
Total
13400

11

4881
1

10358

1

1

1

3

1
8

3
3
6

Other form of
assessable
output

Research
datasets and
databases

Scholarly
edition

Digital or
visual media

1

36
4

Devices and
products

Research
report for
external
body

Exhibition

Artefact

4

Design

4861

Composition

10

Performance

7

Website
content

Patent/publis
hed patent
application

13382

Software

Conference
contribution

Chapter in
book

5

Journal
article

UOA Name
1
Clinical Medicine
Public Health, Health Services and
2
Primary Care
Allied Health Professions, Dentistry,
3
Nursing and Pharmacy
Psychology, Psychiatry and
4
Neuroscience
5
Biological Sciences
Agriculture, Veterinary and Food
6
Science
Earth Systems and Environmental
7
Sciences
8
Chemistry
9
Physics
10 Mathematical Sciences
11 Computer Science and Informatics
Aeronautical, Mechanical, Chemical
12 and Manufacturing Engineering
Electrical and Electronic Engineering,
13 Metallurgy and Materials
14 Civil and Construction Engineering
15 General Engineering
Architecture, Built Environment and
16 Planning
Geography, Environmental Studies
17 and Archaeology
18 Economics and Econometrics
19 Business and Management Studies
20 Law
21 Politics and International Studies
22 Social Work and Social Policy
23 Sociology
Anthropology and Development
24 Studies
25 Education
Sport and Exercise Sciences, Leisure
26 and Tourism
27 Area Studies
28 Modern Languages and Linguistics
29 English Language and Literature
30 History
31 Classics
32 Philosophy
33 Theology and Religious Studies
Art and Design: History, Practice and
34 Theory
Music, Drama, Dance and Performing
35 Arts
Communication, Cultural and Media
36 Studies, Library & Info. Management

Edited book

Authored
book

Table 4: Output types submitted to the REF across the 36 units of assessment

11

3919

21
1

5249
4698
6446
6994
7651

2
4
4
1
8

6
3

1
2

1

3

12

9
4

2
1

18

7
5

1
1

8

3

11

1

114

17

16

58

1

29
1
31
47
16
153
8

1

9126
8608

38
135
3

1

4143

1

1

4025
1384
8679

13

4

3781

9
2
3
2
5

7
168
103
24
10
6

6017
2600
12202
5522
4365
4784
2630

2
6

10
1

14
4

2013
5519

2

4
57
139
47
21
5
6

9
6
13
2
1
3

1
8
98
16
7
1
9

7
18
13
58
15
21
5

2757
1724
4932
6923
6431
1386
2173
1558

229

38

266

2934

77

380
12
160
745
775
440
350

121
6
25
63
34
36

459
28
179
1219
415
435
230

4969
2388
11668
3454
3082
3703
2002

23
2
52
1
1
5
1

215
405

83
22

316
548

1355
4322

1
64

39
262
760
1678
1320
284
243
391

1
53
238
397
290
125
25
63

33
414
1397
2026
1815
517
525
492

2668
975
2380
2472
2832
401
1344
579

6
4
44
11
20
5
2
6

590

230

1133

1657

198

22

5

31

119

18

68

675

1131

38

19

204

6

3

170

4

6321

461

170

873

1264

41

2

4

19

324

638

3

21

48

11

1

165

58

6

132

5

4246

488

97

811

1845

49

3

6

3

6

9

23

33

2

88

5

10

33

6

3517

1
4
2

4
3

1

1
1
1
9
25
14
8
6
2

154

2
38

1
1
4
1
1

3

2

1
3

2
1

1
1
3

8
143

2

9
2
4
2
3

5
10
2

3

Chapter 5
Table 5: Summary of studies of correlating indicators and outcomes of peer review (using data from the 2001 and 2008 RAEs). Note: all references are
provided in the references section of Supplementary Report I.
Authors

Overall aims

Academic field(s)

Butler & Mcallister (2011)

Mahdi, D’Este, & Neely

Norris and Oppenheim

(2008)

(2010)

Applied a metrics-based model

Analysed all 204K individual

Examined whether the

developed in earlier studies of political

submissions to the 2001RAE. collective h-index and its

identify potential predictors of the

science to the field of chemistry, using

Citations were counted at the

variant the g-index

2008 RAE (for environment and

data from the 2001 RAE. The model

level of the individual

correlate with the outcome

outputs).

identified the best predictors of the

submissions for all journal

of the UK 2008 RAE

RAE results in political science (Butler

articles covered by the WoS

rankings.

& McAllister, 2009).

(55% of the submissions)

Political Science

All 2001 RAE disciplines

Chemistry

McKay (2012)

Applied a metrics based model to

Library and information

Social work and social policy and

science; Anthropology;

administration

Pharmacy
Assessment exercise

2001 RAE

2001 RAE

2008 RAE

2008 RAE

Study findings presented

The most important and statistically

The citation counts were a

In the field of pharmacy, a

A metrics-based assessment can

by the authors

significant predictive variables were:

reasonable proxy for the

strong correlation existed

predict reasonably well the overall

citations (inc to journal articles, books

RAE results in the biological

between the RAE ranking

outcome of the 2008 RAE in terms

and book chapters) and departmental

sciences, clinical sciences,

and the median bibliometric of research environment, but not

size (represented by student numbers).

chemistry and psychology.

scores. Library and

research outputs. Authors did not

Research income was not a strong

The correlations were much

information science showed

always choose to submit their most

155

predictor, nor was departmental size if

weaker for RAE results for a

a moderate correlation,

highly cited work to the RAE. It is

measured by staff numbers. Whether or

large number of disciplines,

whereas in anthropology

possible to explain a great deal of

not a department had a member on the

including fields in the

the correlation was negative the variation in scores awarded for

assessment panel was a strong predictor

biomedical and engineering

or non-existent.

of the RAE outcome. This model was

sciences, and including fields

more difficult to find a quantitative

able to explain 60% of the variance in

that are well covered in WoS.

counterpart to the peer assessment

RAE outcome in political science, and

The citation counts are even

of research outputs". This supports

86% of this variance in chemistry.

less valuable for fields not

the panel’s insistence on reading

However, in political science citation

well covered in the citation

the particular works, rather than

count was the best predictor, while in

index.

using shortcuts based on the

research environment, "but rather

chemistry research income correlated

identity of the journal. The output

strongest with the RAE results. The

measures applied in the study

latter indicator had almost no predictive

related to the type of output and

power in political science. The study

their journals and publishers. "At

also analysed in what sense the RAE

least in this subject, metrics are

results would have been different if the

more suited as handmaiden to peer

model had been applied. For 34% of

review than its replacement".

the 113 departments, the results would
have been different if the RAE had
been purely metrics based. However,
the results point to strong differences
between SSH and STEM disciplines

156

Continued:
Authors

Taylor (2011)

Kelly & Burrows (2012)

Mryglod, Kenna, Holovatch, &

Allen & Heath (2013)

Berche (2013)
Overall aims

Studied the extent to which

Developed an exploratory

Analysed the correlation between

the outcomes of the RAE

model to predict the RAE 2008 peer review scores in a range of

2008 can be explained by a

academic disciplines for RAE 2008,

set of quantitative

at the level of the research group.

Study of the relation between RAE 2008
results and reputations rankings

indicators
Academic field(s)

Business and management;

Sociology

A range of academic disciplines

Politics and International Studies

from natural sciences to social

Economics and

sciences and humanities

econometrics;
Accounting and finance
Assessment exercise

2008 RAE

2008 RAE

2008 RAE

2008 RAE

Study findings

Each of the three

They found that 83% of the

The citation measure in Thomson

The number of articles in top journals

presented by the

components of research

variance in outcomes can be

Reuters Research Analytics was

(defined by rankings) as percentage of all

authors

activity (namely, research

predicted by a combination of

poorly related to RAE scores. The

submissions was associated with the

output, esteem and research

simple metrics: the quality of

study concludes that these

institutes top grading in the RAE (4*).

environment) was highly

journals in the submission,

indicators should not be used in

The types of output also mattered. Top

correlated with quantitative

research income per capita and

place of peer review. However, a

press monographs were most strongly

indicators. The judgement

the scale of research activity.

measure of total impact in which

associated with 4* grades. The proportion

of the panels was biased in

The most powerful single

the size of the department was

of articles in top-ten journals also had a

favour of Russell Group

predictor of how well a

taken into account, strongly

positive and significant association with

157

universities. The study also

submission did in the 2008

correlated to overall strength

4* work. The study concludes that

showed some evidence of

RAE was how well it did in

according to the RAE in a number

publisher reputations are good predictors

bias by the economics and

the 2001 RAE. The model

of fields. This is especially the case

of research quality as graded by the RAE.

econometrics panel. The

used a sophisticated indicator

for large research groups. For

The explanation is that the panels are

authors support the use of

to measure both the

smaller groups the correlation

based in the same communities that

quantitative indicators in

normalised citation rate and

becomes weaker or disappears. This review manuscripts. If the correlation

the research assessment

the centrality of a journal for

correlation is moreover stronger for

would not exist, it would mean that the

process, they propose in

the field. Measured in this

the hard sciences than for other

panels were not representative of the

particular a journal quality

way, the percentage of journal

fields. In the more specific

discipline as a whole, the authors argue.

index. "Requiring the

articles included in a

comparison of academic impact and

The study also found that large

panels to take bibliometric

submission that were

quality, the study finds weak

departments that submitted many outputs

indicators into account

published in the ‘top’ quartile

correlations for the majority of

did better in the RAE on average. Having

should help not only to

of journals proved to be the

disciplines: chemistry, physics,

a member on the RAE sub-panel also

reduce the workload of

best citation based predictor of

engineering, geography and

contributed to the score. Overall, the study

panels but also to mitigate

the outcomes of the 2008

environmental studies, sociology

concludes that both RAE judgements and

the problem of implicit

RAE. It should be noted that

and history. The authors conclude

reputational rankings are based on peer

bias."

the study restricted itself to

that citation indicators should not

review. The advantage of using the latter

those submissions that

be used in isolation to compare or

is that they are based on the opinion of

involved publications in

rank research groups or higher

more people.

journals covered in Thomson

education institutes.

Reuter’s Journal Citation
Reports (34% of all
submissions).

158

Chapter 9
Table 6: Background information on the use of citation data by REF2014 sub-panels
The units of assessment (UOAs), grouped by main panel, are listed below; those that were provided
with citation data within the REF process are highlighted.
Main

Unit of Assessment

Panel
1

Clinical Medicine

2

Public Health, Health Services and Primary Care

3

Allied Health Professions, Dentistry, Nursing and Pharmacy

4

Psychology, Psychiatry and Neuroscience

5

Biological Sciences

6

Agriculture, Veterinary and Food Science

7

Earth Systems and Environmental Sciences

8

Chemistry

9

Physics

10

Mathematical Sciences

11

Computer Science and Informatics

12

Aeronautical, Mechanical, Chemical and Manufacturing Engineering

13

Electrical and Electronic Engineering, Metallurgy and Materials

14

Civil and Construction Engineering

15

General Engineering

16

Architecture, Built Environment and Planning

17

Geography, Environmental Studies and Archaeology

18

Economics and Econometrics

19

Business and Management Studies

20

Law

21

Politics and International Studies

22

Social Work and Social Policy

A

B

C

159

D

23

Sociology

24

Anthropology and Development Studies

25

Education

26

Sport and Exercise Sciences, Leisure and Tourism

27

Area Studies

28

Modern Languages and Linguistics

29

English Language and Literature

30

History

31

Classics

32

Philosophy

33

Theology and Religious Studies

34

Art and Design: History, Practice and Theory

35

Music, Drama, Dance and Performing Arts

36

Communication, Cultural and Media Studies, Library and Information
Management

160

List of Abbreviations and Glossary
AHRC

Arts & Humanities Research Council

AMRC

Association of Medical Research Charities

ANVUR

National Agency for the Evaluation of the University and Research
Systems (Italy)

ARMA

Association of Research Managers and Administrators

BA

British Academy

BIS

Department for Business, Innovation and Skills

CASRAI

Consortia Advancing Standards in Research Administration
Information

CERIF

Common European Research Information Format

COPE

Committee On Publication Ethics

CRIS

Current Research Information System

CWTS

Centrum voor Wetenschap en Technologische Studies (Centre for
Science and Technology Studies)

DOI

Digital Object Identifier

DORA

(San Francisco) Declaration on Research Assessment

EARMA

European Association of Research Managers and Administrators

ERA

Excellence in Research for Australia (also European Research Area
in annex)

ERC

European Research Council

ERIH

European Reference Index for the Humanities

ESRC

Economic & Social Research Council

GERD

Gross expenditure on research and development

h-index

Hirsch-Index

HEFCE

Higher Education Funding Council for England

HEI

Higher education institution

161

HEP

Higher education provider

HEPI

Higher Education Policy Institute

HESA

Higher Education Statistics Agency

H2020

Horizon2020

ISBN

International Standard Book Number

ISNI

International Standard Name Identifier

ISSN

International Standard Serial Number

JIF

Journal Impact Factor

Jisc

Formerly the Joint Information Systems Committee

LSE

London School of Economics and Political Science

MENA

Middle East and North Africa

MRC

Medical Research Council

NCURA

National Council of University Research Administrators

NERC

Natural Environment Research Council

NIH

National Institute for Health

NISO

National Information Standards Organization

ORCID

Open Researcher and Contributor ID

OSIP

Overview of System Interoperability Project

PLOS

Public Library of Science

PLOS ONE

A multidisciplinary open-access journal published by PLOS

PRF

Performance-based research funding

PubMed

A free search engine accessing primarily the MEDLINE database of
references and abstracts on life sciences and biomedical topics

PVC

Pro Vice Chancellor

RAE

Research Assessment Exercise

REF

Research Excellence Framework

162

RO

Research Organisation

RCUK

Research Councils UK

RRI

Responsible Research and Innovation

RS

Royal Society

SCI

Science Citation Index

SCOPUS

Bibliographic database containing abstracts and citations for
academic journal articles owned by Elsevier

SJR

SCImago Journal Rank

SPRU

Science Policy Research Unit

SRA

Society of Research Administrators International

SSH

Social Sciences and Humanities

STEM

Science, Technology, Engineering and Mathematics

UKPRN

UK Provider Reference Number

UOA

Unit of Assessment

WoS

Web of Science

163

